This guidance document contains Assured Advice 
under the ACS Primary Authority Scheme.  
For more details visit www.acs.org.uk/assured-adviceUnderstanding how to manage underage sales is probably 
the main compliance challenge a convenience store retailer 
faces. This guide explains what you are legally obligated to do; 
what you should consider doing as best practice; and how you 
put in place the policies and procedures that will help you to 
manage this difficult area successfully. 
PREVENTING UNDERAGE SALES
ALCOHOL  (18)
Selling alcohol to someone under 18 can lead to an on the 
spot fine of £90, a caution that appears on your criminal 
record or formal prosecution including an unlimited fine. 
If you are found to have ‘persistently sold alcohol to 
under 18s you could face an immediate closure order for 
between 48 hours and 336 hours (14 days), or an unlimited 
fine. You need to have a licence from the local authority in 
order to sell alcohol and failing to prevent underage sales 
will put that licence at risk.V
See page 10 for the references below numbered I to XV in the  
‘Relevant legislation or additional guidance’ section.  1. WHAT IS AGE RESTRICTED?
Legally age restricted productsNo legal age restriction in place
2 3LIGHTER FUEL/BUTANE  (18)
Selling either of these products to an under 18 is illegal 
and can lead to an unlimited fine and up to six months  
in prison.VI 
VAPES AND E-CIGARETTES  (18)
A person who sells a nicotine inhaling product (this 
includes nicotine cartridges, nicotine refill substances and 
nicotine inhaling devices) to someone under the age of 
18 commits an offence. This is a strict liability offence; the 
owner of the business can be held responsible as well as 
the member of staff who made the sale. The penalty for 
selling these products is a fine of up to £2,500.VIIITOBACCO AND CIGARETTE  
PAPERS  (18)
Selling cigarettes, rolling tobacco or cigarette papers to 
an under 18 can lead to a caution – resulting in a criminal 
record – or a formal prosecution including a fine of up 
to £2,500. It can also cause a ‘tobacco banning order’, 
banning either the store or the individual from  
selling tobacco.VIIFIREWORKS  (16, 18)
Fireworks have different age restrictions based on what 
category they are. It is illegal to sell category F1 (indoor 
use, low hazard and low noise) fireworks such as party 
poppers to anyone under 16.  It is illegal to sell category F2 
(for outdoor use in confined areas) and F3 (for outdoor use 
in large open areas) fireworks to anyone under 18. In both 
cases an underage sale can lead to an unlimited fine and up 
to three months in prison. 
Category F4 fireworks, category T2 theatrical pyrotechnics 
and category P2 pyrotechnic articles can only be sold to 
people over 18 who have specialist knowledge and these 
items must not be sold in convenience stores.I
AEROSOL PAINT  (16)
Selling these products to an under 16 is against the law and 
can lead to fine of up to £2,500.II 
CHRISTMAS CRACKERS  (12)
Selling Christmas crackers to a person under the age of 12 
is illegal and can lead to an unlimited fine and up to three 
months in prison.I
DVDS AND VIDEO GAMES  (12, 15, 18)
All DVDs carry a British Board of Film Classification 
(BBFC) certificate. All video games carry a Pan European 
Game Information (PEGI) Certificate. These are both legal 
age restrictions. It is illegal to sell or rent that product to 
someone who is under that certified age. The penalty is an 
unlimited fine and up to six months in prison.XIII
ONLINE VERIFICATION
Age verification cards and e-vouchers may be sold 
specifically for customers who need to prove their age 
online. The most common age verification is 18+, where the 
same rules apply for checking ID before selling the card/
voucher as with other age restricted products.PETROL  (16)
It is generally against the law to supply petrol to anyone 
under the age of 16. This is imposed by the terms of a fuel 
retailers licence to sell petrol. The penalty is an unlimited 
fine and up to twelve months in prison.XIV  
KNIVES  (18)
Selling a knife (including a cutlery knife) or blade to an 
under 18 is illegal and can lead to an unlimited fine and up 
to six months in prison. The Offensive Weapons Act 2019 
makes it a criminal offence to sell and dispatch bladed 
articles  sold online without verifying the buyer is over 18 
both at point of sale and at delivery. Packages must be 
clearly labelled to indicate their contents and that they 
must be handed to a person over the age of 18. Bladed 
products, that is products that can cut a persons skin 
must not be delivered to a resential address. Home Office 
guidance on the sale of knives is available at: 
http:/ /bit.ly/1YPJHSZX. Additional guidance on offensive 
weapons is available here: http:/ /tinyurl.com/3yb2kxyfLOTTERY  (18)
It is illegal to sell National Lottery products (including 
scratchcards) to anyone under the age of 18. The penalty 
is an unlimited fine and up to two years in prison. No 
persons under 16 are allowed to sell these products. There 
are strict rules for the authorisation of 16 and 17 year old 
sellers (See page 11 and IX). It is also a breach of your 
National Lottery Retailer Agreement for prizes to be paid 
out to someone under 18. Underage sales can lead to a 
termination of your retailer agreement with the lottery 
operator, and to the removal of your lottery terminal.IXNo age restriction in place
EGGS, FLOUR AND TOILET PAPER
There is no legal prohibition on sales of eggs, flour or 
toilet paper to an underage person. However there are 
times in the year especially around Halloween (31 October) 
when local police or other community representatives 
may ask you to limit their sale to under 18s to prevent 
anti-social behaviour. You should listen to such requests 
constructively and accommodate them if you can.  HIGH CAFFEINE / ENERGY DRINKS  (16)
There is no legal prohibition on energy drinks. However 
you should be aware that all major UK manufacturers 
advise that these products are not suitable for children 
which they define as under 16 years old. You may decide 
to impose a restricted sale policy on your own initiative, or 
you may be asked to do so by the local school or parents 
group. You should listen to such requests constructively 
and accommodate them if you can.IV
SAFETY RAZOR BLADES  (UNDER 2 mm)
The Criminal Justice Act 1988, makes it an offence to sell 
to a person under 18 years any razor blade but does not  
apply to replacement cartridges for safety razors, where 
less than 2 mm of the blade is exposed. Businesses should 
ensure staff are aware of which blades are considered 
safety blades and so legal to sell to under 18s.LADS' MAGAZINES  (16)
Men’s lifestyle magazines (Lads’ Mags) do not have an age 
restriction, but you may choose to implement a policy to 
prevent their sale to under 16s.ADULT MAGAZINES  (18)
Adult (pornographic) magazines are not legally age 
restricted. However, it is commonly accepted and 
recommended that you do not sell pornographic 
magazines to anyone under the age of 18. There are also 
strict laws on display magazines that breach the Obscene 
Publications Act, and you should be careful about 
products obtained from less established  
trade channels.IIIACIDS/CORROSIVE SUBSTANCES  (18)
The Offensive Weapons Act 2019 introduced a new 
offence of selling certain harmful corrosive products to 
under 18s and placed new restrictions on online sales of 
corrosive products, including restrictions on deliveries to 
residential premises.XV
MEDICINES  (12, 16)
There is no legal prohibition on the sale of General Sales 
List (commonly known as over the counter) medicines such 
as aspirin and paracetamol in convenience stores. However 
it is recommended that you do not sell aspirin containing 
products to a person under-16 or an analgesic (such as 
paracetamol) to anyone under the age of 12. You should also 
never sell any such product in quantities greater than 32 
tablets in one transaction to anyone.XCBD PRODUCTS  (18)
CBD is often sold as a food or food supplement, e-cigarette 
or cosmetic. CBD products must contain no THC. Businesses 
must ensure that no claims about medical or health benefits 
are being made. Foods or food supplements which contain 
CBD are considered novel foods. The FSA has  produced 
a list of  CBD food products which are linked to a credible 
application for authorisation going through the novel 
foods process. Any products not on the list or marked as 
“removed” should not be sold. Cold pressed hemp oil  
is not a novel food and does not need authorisation.  
The FSA have issued advice on the consumption of CBD for  
healthy adults and vulnerable groups, which is available at   
https:/ /www.food.gov.uk/business-guidance/cannabidiol-cbd . 
Currently there is no age restriction on the sale of CBD, 
though it is recommended products are not sold to under 18s. 
E Cigarettes containing both nicotine and CBD are unlawful. TOBACCO ASSOCIATED PRODUCTS  (18)
There is no legal prohibition on smoking related products 
such as lighters and pipes (except cigarette papers and 
lighter refills); however you may choose not the sell them 
to anyone under the age of 18.
PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
There is no legal age restriction on the sale of psychoactive substances such as solvent based glues, correction fluid, 
anti-freeze and others. However, it is recommended that retailers voluntarily age restrict these substances for those 
under 18, to prevent those at highest risk from gaining access to those products. It is an offence to supply where the 
retailer knows whether the psychoactive substance is likely to be consumed for its psychoactive effects. There is no 
expectation for a retailer to go above and beyond what is reasonable and the offences only apply where there is a 
likelihood of consumption. A retailer should take reasonable steps to make sure they are aware of the potential uses of 
such products. The penalty is 12 months imprisonment and an unlimited fine.XIIAn ACS Assured Advice guide for retailers PREVENTING UNDERAGE SALES acs.org.uk  
© Wine & Spirit Trade Association 2018UNDER 25?
Please show ID  
when buying age  
restricted products
6 age restricted products - badge.indd   1 25/09/2018   11:48:56
If you see a youth or group of 
youths that you suspect may be 
preparing to attempt to buy alcohol, 
try and make a non-confrontational 
early intervention. That lets them 
know you are aware of them, often 
deterring them.  
Just because a customer is 
accompanied by someone who is 
clearly underage, that does not mean 
you should suspect them of being a 
proxy purchaser.One way to avoid personal abuse, 
is to make clear that it is not your 
decision, but it’s company policy,  
or because of the rules applied to 
your licence. 
  
If you see the adult asking the 
child what alcohol they want, or if 
the child’s behaviour suggests the 
alcohol is for them – then you should 
refuse the sale. If you fear for your safety, you 
should try to remove yourself from 
the situation or call for help. If 
you receive abuse or threatening 
behaviour, make sure you report it 
to your manager. For more advice 
on dealing with violence and abuse 
visit: www.acs.org.uk/advice    
Try, as far as possible, to monitor 
what is happening outside your 
store, especially, if young people 
are hanging around. If you see what 
looks like an adult being asked to 
buy a product by a person outside 
the store, refuse the sale to that 
person and report it to the police. ACS recommends the use of Challenge 25 policies for all age restricted sales.
Challenge 25 is a store policy based on two simple principles: 
1.  All staff serving customers should be trained to ‘think 25’. This  
means if a customer is seeking to buy an age restricted product  
(of any kind), the staff member should ask themselves the  
question – ‘does the person in front of me look like they might be 
under the age of 25 years?’ If the answer is yes, then they should ask 
the person for a valid proof of age. If the identification confirms they 
are over the legal age of purchase for that  
product, then it can be sold to them.
2.  The store policy is clearly communicated to customers, usually 
through the use of visible in-store signage. 
Posters, shelf labels, badges and other materials are  
available to download and print from  
http:/ /www.challenge25.org/downloads.htmlChallenge 25Avoiding conflict
Common refusal approaches  
It is normal for retailers and staff to feel apprehensive or 
awkward about asking people to prove their age. However 
this is something that they must overcome, and initial 
concerns are best dealt with through developing strategies 
for approaching the issue that suit the individual. Also, it is worth bearing in mind, that whilst it feels 
awkward for staff, it is actually something that young 
people are very accustomed to and the vast majority 
expect to be asked. Here are the most common 
approaches you can use: Proxy sales  
It is offence for an adult to purchase alcohol, tobacco  
or nicotine inhaling products on behalf of someone 
under age. This is commonly called a ‘proxy sale’.  
You should consider adopting a common approach  
to identifying and preventing proxy sales across all age 
restricted products.It can be very difficult to know if an adult intends to buy 
an age restricted product for or on behalf of someone 
who is underage. Therefore, you are only expected to act 
when an obvious proxy sale is taking place.
Here are some common scenarios:2. APPROACHES TO PREVENTING SALES
Please be prepared to show 
proof of age when buying  
age restricted products
Acceptable forms of ID
• Photographic    
   driving licence 
• Cards showing   
   Pass hologram 
• Passport
UNDER 25?
drinkaware.co.uk
© Wine & Spirit Trade Association 2018
EARLY INTERVENTION STAY CALM AND POLITE
DEFLECTION FLATTERY CONSTRUCTIVESEEK HELP
I have to ask you 
to prove your 
age because it is 
company policy
I can’t serve you today if you 
don’t have ID. But here is a 
leaflet that explains how you 
can get a valid proof of age
Really? Well you 
looking incredibly 
good for your age
Really? But I’m  
30 years old!Can I see some ID please?
Can I help you?
$*!%@!!&%!!
4 5An ACS Assured Advice guide for retailers PREVENTING UNDERAGE SALES acs.org.uk  
ACS recommends you accept the following  
forms of Identification as valid proof of age: 
• Passport 
• Photo driving licence 
• Proof of Age Standards Scheme (PASS)  
 approved proof of age cards. ID checklist
The Government recommends that military ID cards can 
be used as proof of age. Guidance on how to identify 
these cards, including examples of British Army, Royal 
Navy and Royal Air Force ID cards was published in the 
Home Office False ID guidance in July 2012. There are a 
number of different cards and so understanding what is, 
and is not, a legitimate card can be confusing. 
If you trade near a military base, or have a large number 
of service personnel as customers, then we recommend 
you should familiarise yourself with the types of military 
ID used in your area. There are separate ID cards for  
each of the armed forces (army, navy and air force). 
Military ID cards are held by all serving personnel, 
including 16 and 17 year olds, so you must check the 
details on the card, including date of birth and expiry 
date. There is no requirement for these cards to  
be signed.Military ID 
You may have customers that seek to prove their age with 
non-UK passports or National Identity Cards. You can 
expect that all EU and most other international passports 
will carry the following distinguishing features: 
•  paper that does not reflect ultraviolet light or whose  
fluorescence is easily distinguishable from the blue used 
in commonly available fluorescent materials;
• watermarking on the biographical data and visa pages;
•  an intricate, repetitive pattern as the background design 
on each page;
•  a background design on the biographical data page 
that is different to the design(s) on other pages in the 
passport;
• ultra-violet fluorescent ink on the biographical  
 data page. 
If you have suspicions about the validity of any foreign 
passport or ID card you can refuse the sale, but UK 
equality legislation requires that you do not impose a 
policy of refusing all foreign passports or identity cards.Other foreign ID  
For age restricted products excluding alcohol , there are 
additional ways that customers can provide proof of their 
ID digitally. You can accept digital forms of ID under the 
following circumstances:Digital ID
• The purchase does not include alcohol.
•  The method of digital verification that is used is one 
that you understand how to use and is part of an age 
verification system that has been implemented in  
your business. 
•  Digital ID  must comply with Pass 5: 2021 Requirements 
for Digital Presentation of proof of age.3. PROOF OF AGE
The PASS scheme exists to provide you 
with reassurance about which cards you 
can accept as valid proof of age. There 
are a number of card schemes which 
carry the PASS hologram. For details of 
all the PASS approved cards visit:  
http:/ /www.pass-scheme.org.uk/ Proof of Age Standards Scheme
You may want to help your customers to obtain valid ID, 
you can do this by having materials detailing how to apply 
for a PASS card scheme on your premises. These are 
available from CitizenCard at: www.citizencard.com
Facial Age estimation Technology carries out an age 
check on an individual by analysing their biometric 
features when they look into a camera on a device. It 
provides an estimation of the customers age by a simple 
yes or no answer. To use such technology, the technology 
must have been independently verified to ACCS 1: 2020 
Technical Requirements for Age Estimation Technologies 
or a similar standard for accuracy and to ensure it is fully 
compliant with The General Data Protection Regulation.
CHECK THE PHOTOGRAPH
•  Ensure that the photograph is of the person 
presenting the card.
•  The photograph must be printed directly onto the 
plastic of the card – NOT stuck on top of the plastic.
CHECK THE DATE OF BIRTH
•  Calculate the age of the person from the date of birth. 
(It may be useful to have a note on the birth year for a 16 
and 18 year old on the till point.)
•  The date of birth must be printed onto the plastic –  
NOT handwritten or stuck on top of the plastic
CHECK THE DOCUMENT
•  Ensure the card has not been tampered with or altered  
(for example the printed dates have been altered using 
a pen or marker).
•  Feel the card in order to identify whether anything 
has been stuck to the card.Age estimation
The technology must be set to check age at 25 years . If 
the consumer has been identified by the machine as being 
over 25, but the staff member feels that they may be under 
25, they must have the confidence to override it and check 
the ID of the customer in the normal way. Anyone identified 
as being under 25 must be age checked in the usual way. 
Because of the mandatory licensing conditions, for alcohol 
sales, staff may use the Age Estimation as a guide only, but 
must always carry out their own visual check in the normal 
way and we recommend this is done for all sales of age 
restricted products. Any training must reflect this.
•  Examples of acceptable documentation are   
available on page 6. 
•  Check for security features on a driving licence, such 
as raised text and an image that changes when the 
card is tilted to ensure it is genuine. Only accept cards 
that  have the expected security features.
CHECK THE PASS HOLOGRAM 
(IF NOT A PASSPORT OR DRIVING LICENCE)
•  Look for the 3D effect in the background of the 
hologram.
•  Make sure it has the characteristic tick on the ‘A’ in the 
PASS lettering.
•  The hologram must be flush with the plastic of the card 
– NOT stuck on top of the plastic. 
CHECK THE PERSON
•  If you are still unsure about a person’s age, your legal 
responsibility is to refuse to sell.
• A genuine ID that has been tampered with.
• A genuine ID that is not actually theirs.
• A fake ID that is an imitation of a genuine ID card type.•  A fake ID that is made for the purpose of looking 
genuine, but is not a real scheme.REMEMBER young people attempting to deceive you into selling them an  
age restricted product can do so by presenting you with:
6 7An ACS Assured Advice guide for retailers PREVENTING UNDERAGE SALES acs.org.uk  
1
1
24
532 3 4 5
The Psychoactive Substances Act (2016) came into 
force on 26 May 2016, replacing previous legislation 
on intoxicating substances. The primary purpose of the 
legislation is to stop the sale of items that are commonly 
known as ‘legal highs’. However, the Act will also have 
implications for legitimate retailers, which in many cases 
will sell psychoactive substances such as butane and 
solvents entirely legitimately.  If you choose to provide a delivery service for goods that are sold online, you typically have three options for doing 
so. You can take control of the entire process, work with a delivery-only partner or work with an established delivery 
and ordering platform such as Deliveroo or Uber Eats. For the sale of age restricted products, ID checks must be 
carried out before any goods are delivered to a customer. Where retailers are in control of the ordering process, they 
are responsible for checking the ID of the customer before a delivery. Established delivery and ordering platforms, 
such as Deliveroo or Uber Eats may take on the responsibility for age verifications checks as part of the terms and 
conditions of their contract with you. You must check the details of this before any transactions are made, ensuring 
you have clearly in writing who is responsible for the age verification checks.
The below processes do not apply to the online sales of bladed articles, bladed products, and corrosive substances. 
Specific ACS guidance that covers the online sales processes of these items is available at acs.org.uk/advice
Under the new rules, a psychoactive substance is defined 
as one which affects a person’s mental functioning 
or emotional state by stimulating or depressing their 
nervous system.In practice, this would include the kind 
of effect that we associate with controlled drugs, such as 
hallucinations, changes in alertness, perception of time 
and space, mood or empathy with others and drowsiness.  
All of the substances that were covered by the previous 
Intoxicating Substances Act will now be covered by the 
Psychoactive Substances Act. This includes the following:What is a psychoactive substance?
Retailer in control  
of deliveryRetailer contracts  
third party for deliveryOrder placed through third 
party application/service
A large range of substances are exempt from the 
Psychoactive Substances Act because they are fully 
regulated by existing laws. These exempted substances are:
• Food
• Any medicinal products
• Alcohol
• Controlled drugs
• Nicotine and tobacco products
• CaffeineWhat is not  a psychoactive substance?Solvent  
based glues  Correction fluid
and thinnerMarker pens
Aerosols:   
including deodorant, 
furniture polish and air 
freshenersAnti-freeze Nail varnish  
and nail varnish 
removerNitrous oxide 
canisters   
(such as those  
used in whipped 
cream dispensers)Under the regulations, retailers are expected to take 
reasonable steps to satisfy themselves that they are aware 
of the use of a potentially psychoactive substance. These 
reasonable steps are detailed below. 
Age restrictions
The new legislation provides no legal age restriction on 
the sale of psychoactive substances for purposes other 
than consumption, but it is recommended that retailers 
voluntarily age-restrict potential psychoactive substances 
for those under 18 to prevent those at highest risk from 
gaining access to these products. 
Retailer checklist (reasonable steps) 
• Be aware of any substances you sell in store that could  
 be psychoactive. 
•  Make sure your staff are trained to be able to identify and 
assess the risk of the psychoactive substances you sell.
•  Consider placing warning signs in store to highlight 
policies to customers and staff.
• Consider policy to restrict the quantity of psychoactive  
 substances being sold i.e. using Electronic Point of Sale
 Point of Sale Checklist (Reasonable Steps). 
Retailers should train their staff to use the 
following checklist: 
•  What is the apparent physical/mental state of the 
customer? Are they drunk/intoxicated? Do they have 
physical symptoms of intoxication, such as bad skin, 
weeping eyes or a rash around the nose? 
•  What is the substance? Is it something that has been 
flagged as high risk?
•  What quantity of the product is the customer 
attempting to purchase? 
•  What time is the purchase taking place? Items 
purchased during unsociable hours might be more at 
risk for example late in the evening.
•  What else is the customer buying? Is it part of a weekly 
shop, or solely a purchase of a psychoactive substance? 
Testing
An established retailer, which sells a wide variety 
of products entirely legitimately, is not expected to 
know whether each and every one of them contains a 
psychoactive substance. Retailers are not expected to 
undertake testing of substances to confirm whether they 
are psychoactive.
Penalties
For summary prosecutions, imprisonment not exceeding 
12 months or a fine. On indictment, imprisonment of 
up to seven years and an unlimited fine. Breaching the 
Psychoactive Substances Act can also have an impact on 
your alcohol licence, which could include a review of your 
premises licence or the removal of a personal licence.Retailer’s responsibilities5. PSYCHOACTIVE SUBSTANCES
8 94. ONLINE SALES
An order is made remotely  
by a customer.
Any issues with delivery or 
refusals to deliver should be 
recorded, as with refusals 
made in-store.FACE TO FACE  
ID VERIFICATION:  
At the door, ID must be 
checked by the member of 
staff delivering the products. 
If additional ID verification 
has already taken place 
online, the products must 
not be accepted by someone 
other than the person whose 
ID has been verified.FACE TO FACE  
ID VERIFICATION:  
At the door, ID must be 
checked by the third party 
delivering the products. 
Products must not be 
accepted by someone other 
than the person whose ID  
has been verified online  
by the retailer.In-store, the order is 
prepared for delivery and 
then given to the member 
of staff responsible for 
delivering the products.ONLINE ID VERIFICATION:  
The retailer checks the ID  
of the customer online  
using a compliant*  
ID verification scheme.ID VERIFICATION:  
Ensure that ID verification is 
carried out by the third party 
service as part of the terms  
of business.An order is made remotely  
by a customer.
Delivery is made by the 
third party. Any issues with 
delivery or refusals to deliver 
should be communicated to 
the retailer so they can  
be recorded.In-store, the order is 
prepared for delivery.ONLINE ID VERIFICATION:  
The retailer checks the ID  
of the customer online  
using a compliant*  
ID verification scheme.
The retailer is made aware 
of the order and goods are 
prepared for delivery.
Delivery is made by the 
third party. Any issues with 
delivery or refusals to deliver 
should be communicated to 
the retailer so they can  
be recorded.The order and ID information 
are handed over to the third 
party delivery partner.
The order is handed  
over to the third party 
delivery partner.An order is made remotely 
by a customer using a third 
party service/app.
* The operator of the digital verification scheme can demonstrate compliance with BSI PAS 1296 – Online Age Checking: Provision and Use of Online Age Check Services.© Wine & Spirit Trade Association 2018UNDER 25?
Please show ID  
when buying age  
restricted products
6 age restricted products - badge.indd   1 25/09/2018   11:48:56© Wine & Spirit Trade Association 2018UNDER 25?
Please show ID  
when buying age  
restricted products
6 age restricted products - badge.indd   1 25/09/2018   11:48:56An ACS Assured Advice guide for retailers PREVENTING UNDERAGE SALES acs.org.uk  
An ACS Assured Advice guide for retailers PREVENTING UNDERAGE SALES acs.org.uk  
Keeping good records is imperative to showing your 
excellent standards in preventing underage sales. This 
will be essential should the police, trading standards or 
licensing officers come to check your store’s compliance.
 It is vitally important that you keep records of your 
policies on the products that are age restricted by law.  
It is also sensible to keep similar records for other 
products where you choose to have policies in place.
We recommend that you have a document on file that 
sets out your company’s policy on preventing underage 
sales. This should be easily accessible in every shop that 
you operate. You are legally required to have an age 
verification policy in place for the sale of alcohol. If you Your company policy 
have one policy that covers all age restricted products, 
including alcohol, this satisfies the specific legal obligation. 
A template of this document is available for primary 
authority scheme members to download at   
acs.org.uk/advice
The precautions as detailed within this guide are in place 
to ensure you play your part to prevent age restricted 
products landing in the hands of children, and to provide 
you with a strong defence should an underage sale takes 
place at your premise.
 
You must prove that you took ‘all reasonable precautions’ 
and exercised ‘all due diligence’ to avoid committing an 
offence. This means that you have done all you reasonably 
could in setting up an effective policy within your business 
to avoid the offence being committed. Your records will 
demonstrate that this policy has been fully implemented, 
regularly monitored and updated as necessary. Crucially 
you can provide evidence that everyone working within the 
business knew and understood the policy.  Understanding Reasonable Precautions and Due Diligence 
The “Reasonable Precautions and Due Diligence” defence 
can be applied to the following age restricted products 
alcohol, tobacco, knives, videos and DVDs, fireworks and 
crackers, electronic cigarettes, and lighter fluid/ butane. 
To demonstrate an effective defence, requirements will 
vary according to the size and nature of your business. 
A business operating one or two stores following the 
procedures set out in this guide would satisfy ‘due 
diligence’ for preventing underage sales. It may be that 
a bigger business could be reasonably expected to have 
further procedures in place. Systems should be tested 
to ensure they are working correctly with changes being 
made where necessary.It is vitally important that you keep records of the training 
your staff undertake. Each member of staff should have 
their own training record which records the date they 
underwent induction training and the dates of any addition 
training and/or refresher training. This record should be Your staff training
signed by the employee after every training session. 
An example template of a staff training record is available 
for primary authority scheme members to download at  
acs.org.uk/advice
It is vital that you and all your staff record each time you 
refuse a sale for failure to provide valid identification or 
under the suspicion the product was being bought as part of 
a proxy purchase. 
Most retailers keep a book or folder for this purpose. 
However, some retailers choose to integrate the recording 
of an underage sale refusal into their electronic point of sale 
equipment. This is fine, as long as you can generate reports 
if you have an inspection. 
A refusals register must be regularly reviewed by you or 
other management employed in your business. You should 
assess the register for evidence of:Your refusals register
• Days and times when refusals appear to not be  
 taking place. 
•  Staff members that appear to not be refusing  
   (or recording refusals).
•  If you notice anything unusual about the pattern of 
refusals recorded you should investigate to find the 
cause. This may involve checking CCTV, where available, 
for the time period or speaking to the members of staff 
involved. You should make a record of the investigation 
and any action taken to address the findings.
Each time your refusal records are thoroughly checked by 
you or other management, this should also be recorded.
An example template of this document is available for 
primary authority scheme members to download at  
acs.org.uk/advice6. RECORD KEEPING 7. STAFF TRAINING
Retailers often use their electronic point of sale systems 
to help with underage sales prevention. These systems 
can be a significant help, prompting staff to employ the 
Challenge 25 policy, and also helping management to 
monitor how the policy is being applied in store. The key 
point to bear in mind when using electronic point of sale 
systems are: 
 
• EPoS systems do not replace staff awareness of how to  
 prevent underage sales 
•  Make sure they are programmed correctly to include all 
the age restricted products on sale in the store 
•  If they are linked to CCTV make sure they are 
maintained and working effectively 
If you have any specific questions about your EPoS system 
and underage sales prevention, please contact ACS.
Training your staff to prevent underage sales is the key 
to staying on the right side of the law. This guide sets out 
some basic guidance about how to approach staff training 
in your business. More detailed advice and support is 
available, please direct any questions about this to ACS.
 
Members of staff should not be able to sell age restricted 
products in your store, until they have received full 
training, or are being directly supervised by a fully trained 
staff member. 
 
Induction training should, as a minimum, include a 
clear explanation of the law and company policy. This 
document covers all the elements of age restricted sales 
policy that constitutes induction training. Talking through 
this guide with a new staff member is an effective form 
of induction training. You should also undertake at least 
one full hour of directly supervised customer service with 
you (or another experienced staff member) as part of 
induction training. You should also ask the team member 
to complete a question and answer exercise.
 
There are options for additional formal training that 
you can consider. The most common is the Award for 
Personal Licence Holders (specifically for alcohol), 
and is a requirement for all store owners or managers 
who are designated premises supervisors. There are 
also other qualifications available accredited to the 
National Vocational Qualification (NVQ) standard. These 
qualifications should be considered for staff who have 
management or supervisor responsibilities. For more 
information on these, visit: http:/ /www.cityandguilds.com/
qualifications-and-apprenticeships/retail-and-warehousing  
You should also undertake regular refresher training. This 
is where you refresh your staffs knowledge about  the law 
and company policies. Remember, refresher training does 
not have to be formal you should aim to regularly discuss 
the underage sales prevention issues with your team. You 
could consider displaying the advice in this guide in your 
back offices or behind your till points.
 
We recommend that you undertake formal refresher 
training with your staff at least once every six months. 
One form of refresher training is to use simple questions 
and answer sheets. Ensure your staff sign and date a copy 
of their training sheets and keep it on file with your other 
training records.
 
Question and answer sheets for both induction and 
refresher training are available, for members only,  
to download from:  
http:/ /www.acs.org.uk/advice/age-restrictions/It is illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to sell alcohol 
without the direct supervision of someone who is over 18 
and fully trained. It is also illegal for anyone under the age 
of 18 to sell National Lottery products, except that 16 and 
17 year olds can sell if the sale is authorised at the time by 
a member of staff age 18+, or if they have been authorised 
in advance by the store manager and recorded in writing 
or digitally (following suitable training) to be able to sell 
National Lottery products.Age of staff selling age restricted products  
10 11
Relevant legislation and 
additional guidance  
I  Pyrotechnic Articles (Safety) Regulations 2015  
II  Anti-Social Behaviour Act 2003
III  ACS Lads Mags Guide    
IV  BSDA Code of Practice for High Caffeine Content  
 Soft Drinks   
V Licensing Act 2003
VI The Cigarette Lighter Refill (Safety) Regulations 1999
VII Children and Young Persons Act 1933
VIII  Children and Families Act 2014 and Nicotine Inhaling 
Products (Age of Sale and Proxy Purchasing)  
Regulations 2015
IX  The National Lottery (Revocation and Amendment) 
Regulations 2021
X  The Royal Pharmaceutical Society does not provide 
specific guidance on appropriate age for buying OTC 
medicines. Similarly, the Medicines and Healthcare 
Products Regulatory Agency (MHRA), which ensures that 
medicines and medical devices work and are safe, has not 
issued guidance. Some retail outlets may have specific  
company policies that restrict the sale of OTC medicines  
to children.  
XI Criminal Justice Act 1988
XII Psychoactive Substances Act 2016
XIII Video Recordings Act 2010   
XIV Petroleum (Consolidation) Regulations 2014
XV Offensive Weapons Act 2019This guide is provided by the Association of Convenience 
Stores in consultation with Buckinghamshire and Surrey 
Trading Standards. It was last updated in January 2024. 
Please refer to the ACS website for the most current 
version of this guidance.
This advice was developed by ACS and Buckinghamshire 
and Surrey Trading Standards; as part of a dedicated 
primary authority scheme. This means that all the advice 
that has this mark against it is ‘Assured Advice’.  
Assured Advice means that if you adopt  
this policy in your business, then it must  
be respected by all other local authorities 
and they cannot ask you to adopt a  
different policy. 
This guide covers a range of different issues  
of best practice and law. Those that qualify as assured 
advice are marked by this hallmark.
To benefit from assured advice you must sign up to the 
ACS scheme. All ACS members can sign up to the ACS 
Primary Authority Scheme for details of how to join up 
visit www.acs.org.uk/adviceACS Primary Authority Scheme  
Our website
www.acs.org.uk 
Our social media
@ACS_localshops on X / Twitter and Instagram
Association of Convenience Stores on LinkedIn, Facebook and YouTube  CONTACT
© ACS 2024. Design & illustration by www.fluiddesignstudio.comABOUT THIS GUIDE