Leaders notes
Age restricted 
products
 Age restricted products
 Community Safety
 Doorstep crime
 Food & Hygiene Home fire safety
 Labels, signs & symbols
 Managing money
 Safer independent pedestrians Scams
 Shopper’s rights
 Social media & the internet
 Who can help
 Food and Hygiene  Home Fire Safety
 Labels, Signs and Symbols
 Community Safety
 safer independent pedestrians
 Age-Restricted Products
 Community Safety
 Labels, Signs and Symbols
 SCAMS
 Shoppers’ rights
 Who can help
 Community Safety
 Labels, Signs and Symbols
 SCAMS
 Shoppers’ rights
 Community Safety
 Doorstep Crime
 Food and Hygiene
 Labels, Signs and Symbols
 Managing money
 Shoppers’ rights Labels, Signs and Symbols
 safer independent pedestrians
 Who can help
 Social Media and the Internet
 Food and Hygiene
 Age-Restricted Products
 DOORSTEP CRIME 
 Safer Independent Pedestrians
 Community Safety
 Social Media and the Internet
3Consumer laws control the 
quality and safety of goods and services. In some cases, goods cannot be supplied to anyone below a certain age. These laws exist to safeguard 
the health of young people. We 
need to be aware of the legal age at which different rights or responsibilities apply .
Discussion should include: 
• Why we have laws to protect younger people. 
• Why your rights and responsibilities change as you get 
older (so that you can do more and more is expected  of you).
• Are any of the laws outdated and should they be scrapped or changed.
• Why shopkeepers ask for ‘proof of age’?
• Why ‘proof of age’ cards are useful to all age groups. Consider travelling by trains, boats and planes, cinema entry, festivals, purchase of some videos and computer games, lottery tickets/scratch cards and night club entry.
Some facts:
• It is illegal to buy alcohol if you are under 18. You can 
be stopped, fined or arrested by the Police if you are under 18 and drinking alcohol in public. The police can confiscate the alcohol.  The person who sells the alcohol to you can get a criminal record and be fined up to £5,000.
• It is a crime if somebody who is over 18 buys alcohol for a person who is under 18 years old. This is called ‘proxy 
purchasing’ . They can receive an £80 on the spot fine or 
face prosecution with a fine up to £5,000.
• If you work in a shop, you cannot sell alcohol if you are under 18.• Challenge 25. A shopkeeper should refuse to sell age restricted products to anyone who appears to be under the age of 25 years old and does not have an acceptable form of photo identification (ID), like a PASS card. A shopkeeper can be fined for selling age-restricted products to people who are under age.
• PASS cards have a distinctive PASS logo in the hologram.
The table below shows what age you have to be to legally buy certain things.
Buy and drink alcohol in a licensed premise in Britain
18 or overTobacco products
Lighter refills containing butaneVolatile substances/solvents (ie  paint 
thinners/some types of glue)
Weapons or knivesCrossbowsFireworks & sparklersDVDs, videos, video and computer 
games: Classification 18
Airguns and pellets 17 or over
Aerosol (spray) paint
16 or overLottery tickets / scratch cardsBuy a petCaps, cracker snaps, novelty matches, 
party poppers, serpents and throwdowns
Can drink beer, wine or cider, so long 
as they are 16 or 17 and accompanied by an adult and is bought the drink with a table meal (ie only a place specifically set aside for meals – not in a bar. The alcohol has to be purchased by an adult
DVDs, videos, video and computer 
games: Classification 1515 or over
Christmas crackers. DVDs, videos, video and computer games: Classification 1212 or overAGE RESTRICTED PRODUCTS
Legislation prohibits the sale, supply, 
offer to supply, or hire of specified products to persons under the minimum legal age. There are age restrictions (under the age of 18) applicable to tobacco products, offensive weapons (knives and similar), crossbows, adult fireworks, solvents, airguns, lighter refills containing butane, and alcohol. 
There are age restrictions (under the 
age of 16) applicable to low-hazard low-noise fireworks (party poppers and similar products), lottery tickets, and aerosol paint. The age restriction for Christmas crackers is 12. There are different age restrictions on videos, DVDs, and Blu-ray discs (collectively referred to here as ‘video recordings’ - 12 and over, 15 and over, and 18 and over) and video games (12 and over, 16 and over, and 18 and over).
Legislation also provides 
requirements for certain warnings and notices to be displayed when selling particular products.
Traders should always ask young 
people to produce proof of their age, such as the national Proof of Age Standards Scheme (PASS) card, a photocard driving licence or a passport. TOBACCO
This area is covered by the Children and Young Persons (Protection from Tobacco) Act 1991, the Children and Young Persons Act 1933, and the Protection from Tobacco (Sales from Vending Machines) (England) Regulations 2010.
Under this legislation, it is an offence 
for any person to sell cigarettes, tobacco products or cigarette papers to anyone under 18 years of age, even if they look older. This is the case whether or not the cigarettes are for the young person’s own use. It is also an offence to sell cigarettes unless they are in quantities of ten or more and in their original packaging. This means that packets of cigarettes cannot be split to sell lesser quantities.
ILLEGAL TOBACCO
Illegal tobacco is usually fake products, smuggled genuine products or brands specifically made for the illegal tobacco market.
Young people are being offered 
illegal tobacco more than adults, making it easier for them to smoke. Dealers see underage smokers as easy targets. 
Illegal tobacco has strong links with 
crime and criminal gangs, so many of the people smuggling, distributing and selling it are involved in drug dealing, money laundering, people trafficking and even terrorism.
Additionally, fake cigarettes often 
prove to contain substances that make it even more dangerous than regular tobacco, and criminals avoid paying duty on smuggled imports.Research shows that illegal tobacco:• Encourages children to start 
smoking
• Prevents adult smokers from giving 
up
• Brings organised crime into our communities
Selling illegal tobacco is a crime. 
Crimestoppers
Call 0800 555111 for anonymous 
public reporting. 
5TABLE OF PENALTIES FOR SELLERS OF PRODUCTS TO PERSONS UNDER CERTAIN AGES
The following table, showing penalties for selling, supplying, offering to supply and hiring (as appropriate to the 
legislation) products to persons under certain ages. These penalties are in place to protect young people and a good reason to stop shops selling to those underage.
PRODUCT AGE RESTRICTION MAXIMUM PENALTY
Adult fireworks and sparklers (category 2 [outdoor use - confined areas] and category 3 [outdoor use - large open areas] fireworks) 18 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Aerosol paint 16 and over £2,500 
Alcohol 18 and over Unlimited fine and forfeit of licence 
Christmas crackers 12 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Crossbows 18 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Knives / axes / blades 18 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Lighter refills containing butane 18 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Lottery tickets / ‘instant win’ cards 16 and over Unlimited fine and two years’ imprisonment 
Party poppers and similar low-hazard low-noise fireworks (category 1) (except Christmas crackers) 16 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Petrol 16 and over Unlimited fine and 12 months’ imprisonment 
Tobacco products 18 and over £2,500 
Video recordings: U (universal) Unrestricted N/A 
Video recordings: PG (Parental Guidance) Unrestricted N/A 
Video recordings: classification 12 12 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Video recordings: classification 15 15 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Video recordings: classification 18 18 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Video recordings: classification R18 18 years and over in a licensed sex shop Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Video games: PEGI rating 3 Unrestricted N/A 
Video games: PEGI rating 7 Unrestricted N/A 
Video games: PEGI rating 12 12 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Video games: PEGI rating 16 16 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Video games: PEGI rating 18 18 and over Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Volatile substances / solvents (offence to supply / offer to supply to under 18s occurs ONLY if the person knows or believes it is to be used for intoxication) 18 and over (but see left) Unlimited fine and six months’ imprisonment 
Resources and links
Trading Standards - selling alcohol
Talk to FrankDrink AwareKeep it out
Skills4life Age restricted products
How to earn your award
COMPLETE THE QUIZ AND THE 2 ACTIVITIES BELOW
ACTIVITY 1DESIGN A POSTER IDENTIFYING ALL 
AGE-RESTRICTED PRODUCTS
ACTIVITY  2TALK FROM A LOCAL COMMUNITY WARDEN, COMMUNITY POLICE OFFICER OR NURSE
ACTIVITY  3 QUIZ
7
Activity 3
1. How old must you be before you can buy sparklers? 
2. It is a crime if somebody who is over 18 buys alcohol for a person who is 
under 18. What ‘PP’ is this called? 
3. A shopkeeper will refuse to sell tobacco products to anyone who appears to be under what age? 
4. How could you prove your age to a shopkeeper? 
5. What products do shops and supermarkets have to cover up and hide from public view? 
6. It is an offence to sell National Lottery (Lotto) tickets and Instant Win cards (scratch cards) to any person under what age? 
7. Which ‘TS’ has a duty to enforce the law relating to a number of age 
restricted products. 
8. In order to check businesses are complying with the age-restriction laws, what ‘T’ Purchases are made by Trading Standards? 
9. What is the minimum age you must be before you can buy Christmas 
crackers? 
10. You can be stopped, fined or arrested by the Police if you are under 18 and drinking alcohol in public. Can the Police confiscate the alcohol? QUIZ
Age restricted products
Name:      
Question Answer
Question 1
Question 2Question 3Question 4
Question 5
Question 6Question 7Question 8
Question 9
Question 10Activity 3