Offensive Weapons 
Act 2019
CHAPTER 17
Explanatory Notes have been produced to assist in the
understanding of this Act and are available separately
£16.40
Offensive Weapons Act 2019
CHAPTER 17
CONTENTS
PART 1
CORROSIVE  PRODUCTS  AND  SUBSTANCES
Sale and delivery of corrosive products
1 Sale of corrosive produc ts to persons under 18
2 Defence to remote sale of corrosive products to persons under 183 Delivery of corrosive products  to residential premises etc
4 Delivery of corrosive prod ucts to persons under 18
5 Presumptions in proceedings in Scotland for offence under section 1, 3 or 4
Possession of corrosive substances
6 Offence of having a corrosive substance in a public place
7 Presumptions in proceedings in Scotland for offence under section 68 Appropriate custodial sentence for conviction under section 6
9 Offence under section 6:  relevant convictions
10 Search for corrosive substances: England and Wales11 Search for corrosive substances: Scotland12 Search for corrosive substances: Northern Ireland
Consequential amendments relating to corrosive products and substances
13 Consequential amendments relating to corrosive products and substances
P
ART 2
KNIFE CRIME  PREVENTION  ORDERS
Knife crime prevention orders made  otherwise than on conviction
14 Knife crime prevention order made otherwise than on conviction
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17) ii
15 Requirements for application for order under section 14
16 Application without notice
Interim knife crime prevention orders
17 Interim knife crime prevention order: application without notice
18 Interim knife crime prevention order: application not determined
Knife crime prevention orders made on conviction
19 Knife crime prevention order made on conviction
20 Requirement to consult on app lication for order under section 19
Provisions of knife crime prevention order
21 Provisions of knife crime prevention order
22 Requirements included in knife crime prevention order etc23 Duration of knife crime prevention order etc
Notification requirements
24 Notification requirements
25 Offences relating to notification
Supplementary provisions
26 Review of knife crime prevention order
27 Variation, renewal or discharge of  knife crime prevention order etc
28 Appeal against knife cr ime prevention order etc
29 Offence of breaching knife crime prevention order etc
30 Guidance31 Piloting32 Consequential amendments33 Interpretation of Part
P
ART 3
SALE AND  DELIVERY  OF KNIVES  ETC
34 Sale etc of bladed articles to persons under 18
35 Defence to sale of bladed articles to persons under 18: England and Wales36 Defence to sale etc of bladed ar ticles to persons under 18: Scotland
37 Defence to sale of bladed articles to persons under 18: Northern Ireland
38 Delivery of bladed products to residential premises etc39 Delivery of bladed prod ucts to persons under 18
40 Defences to offence under section 38 or 3941 Meaning of “bladed produc t” in sections 38 to 40
42 Delivery of bladed articles to persons under 18
P
ART 4
POSSESSION  ETC OF CERTAIN  OFFENSIVE  WEAPONS
43 Amendments to the defi nition of “flick knife”
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17) iii
44 Prohibition on the possession  of certain dangerous knives
45 Prohibition on the possession of o ffensive weapons on further education
premises
46 Prohibition on the posses sion of offensive weapons
47 Prohibition on the possession of  offensive weapons: supplementary
48 Surrender of prohibit ed offensive weapons
49 Payments in respect of surrendered offensive weapons
PART 5
THREATENING  WITH  OFFENSIVE  WEAPONS
50 Offence of threatening with offensiv e weapon etc in a public place etc
51 Offence of threatening with offens ive weapon etc on further education
premises
52 Offence of threatening with an offe nsive weapon etc in a private place
53 Search for corrosive substance on school or further education premises
PART 6
FIREARMS
54 Prohibition of certain firearms etc: England and Wales and Scotland
55 Prohibition of certain firearms etc: Northern Ireland56 Consequential amendments relating to sections 54 and 5557 Surrender of prohibited firearms etc58 Payments in respect of surrender ed firearms other than bump stocks
59 Payments in respect of prohibited firearms which are bump stocks60 Payments in respect of ancillary equipment61 Conditions applying to certain firearms: England and Wales and Scotland62 Conditions applying to certain firearms: Northern Ireland63 Interpretation of Part
P
ART 7
ENFORCEMENT
64 Enforcement of offences relating to sale etc of offensive weapons
65 Application of Regulatory En forcement and Sanctions Act 2008
PART 8
SUPPLEMENTARY
66 Guidance on offences relating to offensive weapons etc
67 Consequential amendments relating to armed forces68 Regulations and orders69 Extent70 Commencement71 Short title
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17) iv
Schedule 1 — Corrosive products
Schedule 2 — Consequential amendments relating to sections 54 and 55
ELIZABETH II c. 17
Offensive Weapons Act 2019
2019 CHAPTER 17
An Act to make provision for and in connection with offences relating to
offensive weapons. [16th May 2019]
E IT ENACTED  by the Queen’s most Excellent Majesty, by and with the advice and
consent of the Lords Spiritual and Te mporal, and Commons, in this present
Parliament assembled, and by the authority of the same, as follows:— 
PART 1
CORROSIVE  PRODUCTS  AND  SUBSTANCES
Sale and delivery of corrosive products
1 Sale of corrosive products to persons under 18
(1) A person commits an offence if they sell a corrosive product to a person who is
under the age of 18.
(2) Subject to section 2, it  is a defence for a person charged in England and Wales
or Northern Ireland with an offence un der subsection (1) to prove that they
took all reasonable precau tions and exercised all du e diligence to avoid the
commission of the offence.
(3) Except where section 2 applies, it is  a defence for a pers on (“the accused”)
charged in Scotland with an offence under subsection (1) to show that—
(a) the accused believed the person to whom the corrosive product was
sold (“the purchaser”) to be aged 18 or over, and
(b) either the accused had taken re asonable steps to establish the
purchaser’s age or no reasonable pe rson could have suspected from the
purchaser’s appearance that the purchaser was under the age of 18.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (3)(b),  the accused is to be treated as having
taken reasonable steps to establish the purchaser’s age if and only if—B
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances2
(a) the accused was shown any of the documents mentioned in subsection
(5), and
(b) the document would have convinced a reasonable person.
(5) Those documents are any document bearing to be—
(a) a passport,
(b) a European Union phot ocard driving licence, or
(c) such other document, or a document of such other description, as the
Scottish Ministers may prescribe by order.
(6) The accused is to be taken to have shown a matter mentioned in subsection (3)
if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(7) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland or Northern Ireland, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, to a fine notexceeding level 5 on the st andard scale or to both.
(8) In relation to an offence committed be fore the coming into force of section
281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the reference in subsection (7)(a) to 51weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(9) In Scotland, proceedings for an offence under subsection (1) may be
commenced within the period of 12 months beginning with the commission ofthe offence.
(10) Section 136(3) of the Criminal Pr ocedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (date when
proceedings deemed to be commenced) a pplies for the purposes of subsection
(9) as it applies for the purposes of that section.
(11) Subject to subsection (15) , in this section and sections 2 to 4 “corrosive product”
means—
(a) a substance listed in the first column of Schedule 1, or
(b) a product which contains a substance listed in the first column of that
Schedule in a concentration higher than the limit set out for thatsubstance in the second column of that Schedule.
(12) The appropriate national authority may by regulations amend Schedule 1 by
adding, modifying or removing a refere nce to a substance or a concentration
limit.
(13) Before making regulations under subsection (12) the appropriate national
authority must consult such persons likely to be affected by the regulations asthe authority considers appropriate.
(14) In this section “the appropriate national authority” means—
(a) in relation to England and Wales and Scotland, the Secretary of State,
and
(b) in relation to Northern Ireland, the Department of Justice in Northern
Ireland.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive pr oducts and substances3
(15) References to a corrosive product in this section and sections 2 to 4 do not
include a substance or product which is contained in a battery.
(16) See section 5 for provisions about presumptions as to the content of containers
in proceedings in Scotland.
2 Defence to remote sale of corro sive products to persons under 18
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) is charged with an offence under section 1 (sale
of corrosive products to  persons under 18), and
(b) the seller was not in the presence  of the person (“the buyer”) to whom
the product to which the charge relate s was sold at the time of the sale.
(2) For the purposes of subs ection (1)(b) the seller was not in the presence of the
buyer at the time of the sale if—
(a) where the seller is an individual, the seller or a person acting on the
seller’s behalf was not in the pres ence of the buyer at that time;
(b) where the seller is not an indivi dual, a person acting on the seller’s
behalf was not in the presence of the buyer at that time.
(3) If the seller is charged with the o ffence in England and Wales or Northern
Ireland, the seller is not to be regarded  as having proved that they took all
reasonable precautions and exercise d all due diligence to avoid the
commission of the offence unless, as a minimum, they prove that theconditions in subsections (6) to (9) are met.
(4) If the seller is charged with  the offence in Scotland, it  is a defence for the seller
to show that the conditions in  subsections (6) to (9) are met.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (4) th e seller is to be taken to have shown a
matter mentioned in subsections (6) to (9) if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(6) Condition A is that, at the time the offence is alle ged to have been committed—
(a) the seller operated a system fo r checking that persons who bought
corrosive products by the same or a similar method of purchase to that
used by the buyer were not under the age of 18, and
(b) that system was likely to preven t persons under the age of 18 from
buying corrosive produc ts by that method.
(7) Condition B is that when the packag e containing the corrosive product was
dispatched by the seller, it wa s clearly marked to indicate—
(a) that it contained a corrosive product, and
(b) that, when finally deli vered, it should only be  delivered into the hands
of a person aged 18 or over.
(8) Condition C is that the seller took all reasonable precautions and exercised all
due diligence to en sure that, when finally delivered, the package would be
delivered into the hands of a person aged 18 or over.
(9) Condition D is that the seller did no t deliver the package,  or arrange for its
delivery, to a locker.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances4
(10) Where the corrosive product was dispatched by the seller to a place from
which it was to be collected by the buye r or a person acting on behalf of the
buyer, references in subsections (7) and (8) to the final deli very of the product
are to be read as its supply to the buyer or a person acting on behalf of thebuyer from that place.
(11) In subsection (9) “locker” means a lockable container to which the package was
delivered with a view to its collection by  the buyer, or a person acting on behalf
of the buyer, in accordance with arr angements made between the seller and the
buyer.
3 Delivery of corrosive products to residential premises etc
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) sells a corrosive product to another person (“the
buyer”), and
(b) the seller and the buyer are not in each other’s presence at the time of
the sale.
(2) The seller commits an offence if, for the purposes of supplying the corrosive
product to the buyer, the seller deliv ers the product, or  arranges for its
delivery, to residential premises.
(3) The seller commits an offence if, for the purposes of supplying the corrosive
product to the buyer, the seller deliv ers the product, or  arranges for its
delivery, to a locker.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b) a person (“A”) is not in the presence of
another person (“B”) at any time if—
(a) where A is an individual, A or a person acting on behalf of A is not in
the presence of B at that time;
(b) where A is not an individual, a person acting on behalf of A is not in the
presence of B at that time.
(5) In subsection (2) “resid ential premises” means pr emises used solely for
residential purposes.
(6) The circumstances where premises are not residential premises for the
purposes of that subsection include, in  particular, where a person carries on a
business from the premises.
(7) In subsection (3) “locker” means a lo ckable container to which the corrosive
product is delivered with a view to it s collection by the buyer, or a person
acting on behalf of the buyer, in accordance with arrangements made betweenthe seller and the buyer.
(8) It is a defence for a person charged in  England and Wales or  Northern Ireland
with an offence under this section to prove that they took all reasonableprecautions and exercised all due diligen ce to avoid the commission of the
offence.
(9) It is a defence for a pe rson charged in Scotland with an offence under this
section to show that they took all reas onable precautions and exercised all due
diligence to avoid the co mmission of the offence.
(10) A person is to be taken to have show n a matter mentioned in subsection (9) if—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive pr oducts and substances5
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(11) A person guilty of an offenc e under this section is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland or Northern Ireland, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, to a fine not
exceeding level 5 on the st andard scale or to both.
(12) In relation to an offence committed before the coming into force of section
281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the reference in subsection (11)(a) to 51weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(13) In Scotland, proceedings for an offe nce under this section may be commenced
within the period of 12 months beginn ing with the commission of the offence.
(14) Section 136(3) of the Criminal Pr ocedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (date when
proceedings deemed to be commenced) a pplies for the purposes of subsection
(13) as it applies for the purposes of that section.
(15) See section 5 for provisions about presumptions as to the content of containers
in proceedings in Scotland.
4 Delivery of corrosive products to persons under 18
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) sells a corrosive product to another person (“the
buyer”),
(b) the seller and the buyer are not in each other’s presence at the time of
the sale and the seller is outside the United Kingdom at that time,
(c) before the sale, the seller entered into an arrangement with a person
who is a body corporate by which the person agreed to delivercorrosive products for the seller,
(d) that person was aware when they entered into the arrangement that it
covered the delivery of  corrosive products, and
(e) that person delivers the corr osive product pursuant to that
arrangement.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b) a person (“A”) is not in the presence of
another person (“B”) at any time if—
(a) where A is an individual, A or a person acting on behalf of A is not in
the presence of B at that time;
(b) where A is not an individual, a person acting on behalf of A is not in the
presence of B at that time.
(3) For the purposes of subs ection (1)(b) a person other than an individual is
outside the United Kingdom at any time  i f  t h e  p e r s o n  d o e s  n o t  c a r r y  o n  a
business of selling articles  of any kind from premises  in any part of the United
Kingdom at that time.
(4) The person mentioned in subsection (1)(e) commits an offence if, when they
deliver the corrosive product, they do no t deliver it into the hands of a person
aged 18 or over.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances6
(5) It is a defence for a person charged in  England and Wales or  Northern Ireland
with an offence under subsection (4) to  prove that they took all reasonable
precautions and exercised all due diligen ce to avoid the commission of the
offence.
(6) It is a defence for a person (“the accuse d”) charged in Scotland with an offence
under subsection (4) to show that—
(a) the accused believed the person  into whose hands the corrosive
product was delivered to be  aged 18 or over, and
(b) either the accused had taken reason able steps to establish the person’s
age or no reasonable person coul d have suspected from the person’s
appearance that the person was under the age of 18.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (6)(b),  the accused is to be treated as having
taken reasonable steps to establish the person’s age if and only if—
(a) the accused was shown any of the documents mentioned in subsection
(8), and
(b) the document would have convinced a reasonable person.
(8) Those documents are any document bearing to be—
(a) a passport,
(b) a European Union phot ocard driving licence, or
(c) such other document, or a document of such other description, as the
Scottish Ministers may prescribe by order.
(9) The accused is to be taken to have shown a matter mentioned in subsection (6)
if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(10) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (4) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to a fine;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland or Northern Ireland, to a fine not
exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
(11) In Scotland, proceedings for an offe nce under this section may be commenced
within the period of 12 months beginn ing with the commission of the offence.
(12) Section 136(3) of the Criminal Pr ocedure (Scotland) Act 1995 (date when
proceedings deemed to be commenced) a pplies for the purposes of subsection
(11) as it applies for the purposes of that section.
(13) See section 5 for provisions about presumptions as to the content of containers
in proceedings in Scotland.
5 Presumptions in proceedings in Scotla nd for offence under section 1, 3 or 4
(1) This section applies for the purposes of any trial in proceedings for an alleged
offence under section 1(1), 3(2) or (3) or 4(4).
(2) Where—
(a) a substance is found in a container (whether open or sealed), and
(b) there is on the container a description of the contents of the container,
the substance found is to be presumed to be a substance of that description.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive pr oducts and substances7
(3) Where an open container is found which—
(a) is empty or contains an amount of a substance which is insufficient to
allow analysis of it,
(b) was sealed at the time it  was sold or delivered, and
(c) has on it a description of the contents of the container,
the container is to be presumed to have contained, at the time it was sold or
delivered, a substance of that description.
(4) At the trial, any party to the pr oceedings may rebut the presumption
mentioned in subsection (2) or (3) by pr oving that, at the time of its sale or
delivery, the substance in the containe r was not of the description on the
container.
(5) A party may lead evidence for the pu rpose of rebutting the presumption only
if the party has, not less than 7 days before the date of the trial, given notice ofthe intention to do so to the other parties.
Possession of corrosive substances
6 Offence of having a corrosive substance in a public place
(1) A person commits an offence if they ha ve a corrosive substance with them in a
public place.
(2) It is a defence for a person charged in  England and Wales or  Northern Ireland
with an offence under subs ection (1) to prove that they had good reason or
lawful authority for having the corrosive substance with them in a publicplace.
(3) Without prejudice to the generality of su bsection (2), it is a defence for a person
charged in England and Wales or Nort hern Ireland with an offence under
subsection (1) to prove that they had the corrosive substance with them for useat work.
(4) It is a defence for a person charged in Scotland with an offence under
subsection (1) to show that they had a reasonable excuse or lawful authority forhaving the corrosive substance with them in a public place.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of su bsection (4), it is a defence for a person
charged in Scotland with an offence unde r subsection (1) to show that they had
the corrosive substance with  them for use at work.
(6) A person is to be taken to have sh own a matter mentioned in subsection (4) or
(5) if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(7) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 12 months, to a fine or to both;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months, to a fine no t exceeding the statutory maximum or
to both;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances8
(c) on summary conviction in Northern Ireland, to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 6 months, to a fine not exceeding the statutory
maximum or to both;
(d) on conviction on indictment, to im prisonment for a term not exceeding
4 years, to a fine or to both.
(8) In relation to an offence committed be fore the coming into force of section
154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (maximum sentence that may beimposed on summary conviction of offenc e triable either way) the reference in
subsection (7)(a) to 12 months is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(9) In this section—
“corrosive substance” means a subst ance which is capable of burning
human skin by corrosion;
“public place”, in relation to Engl and and Wales or Northern Ireland,
includes any place to which, at the time in question, the public have or
are permitted access, whethe r on payment or otherwise;
“public place”, in relation to Sc otland, means any place other than
premises occupied as a private dwelling (including any stair, passage,
garden, yard, garage, outhouse or ot her appurtenance of such premises
which is not used in common by the occupants of more than one suchdwelling).
(10) See—
(a) section 7 for provisions about presumptions as to the content of
containers in proceedings in Scotland;
(b) sections 8 and 9 for provisions requiring a court in England and Wales
to impose an appropriate custodial sentence in certain cases.
7 Presumptions in proceedings in Sc otland for offence under section 6
(1) This section applies for the purposes of any trial in proceedings for an alleged
offence under section 6(1).
(2) Where—
(a) a substance is found in a container (whether open or sealed), and
(b) there is on the container a description of the contents of the container,
the substance found is to be presumed to be a substance of that description.
(3) Subsection (4) applies where—
(a) an open container is found,
(b) a substance has been poured out of, or otherwise removed from, the
container,
(c) the container is empty or cont ains an amount of the substance
mentioned in paragraph (b) which is in sufficient to allow analysis of it,
and
(d) the container has on it a description of its contents.
(4) The container is to be presumed to have contained, immediately before the
action mentioned in paragraph (b) of subsection (3) was taken, a substance ofthe description mentioned in paragraph (d) of that subsection.
(5) At the trial, any party to the pr oceedings may rebut the presumption
mentioned in subsection (2) or (4) by proving that, at the time the offence is
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive pr oducts and substances9
alleged to have been committed, the substance in the container was not of the
description on the container.
(6) A party may lead evidence for the pu rpose of rebutting the presumption only
if the party has, not less than 7 days before the date of the trial, given notice ofthe intention to do so to the other parties.
8 Appropriate custodial sentence for conviction under section 6
(1) This section applies where—
(a) a person is convicted of an offence under section 6(1) by a court in
England and Wales, and
(b) when the offence was committed, the person—
(i) was aged 16 or over, and
(ii) had at least one relevant conviction (see section 9).
(2) The court must impose an appropriate custodial sentence (with or without a
fine) unless the court is of the opinion that there are particular circumstances
which—
(a) relate to the offence, to the previous offence or to the offender, and
(b) would make it unjust to do  so in all the circumstances.
(3) An “appropriate custodial sentence” is—
( a ) i n  t h e  c a s e  o f  a  p e r s o n  w h o  i s  a g e d  1 8  o r  o v e r  w h e n  c o n v i c t e d ,  a
sentence of imprisonment for a term of at least 6 months;
(b) in the case of a person who is aged 16 or 17 when convicted, a detention
and training order of at least 4 months.
(4) In the case of a person aged 16 or 17, in considering whether it is of the opinion
mentioned in subsection (2) the court must have regard to its duty under
section 44 of the Children and Young Persons Act 1933 (generalconsiderations).
(5) Subsection (6) applies where—
(a) an appropriate custodial sentence has been imposed on a person under
subsection (2), and
(b) a relevant conviction which resulted  in subsection (2) applying to that
person has subsequently been set aside on appeal.
(6) Notice of appeal against the sentence  may be given at any time within the
period of 28 days beginni ng with the day after the day on which the relevant
conviction was set aside (despite anything  in section 18 of the Criminal Appeal
Act 1968 (initiating procedure)).
(7) This section applies only to an offenc e committed on or after the day on which
this section came into force.
(8) Where an offence is found to have been committed—
(a) over a period of two or more days, or 
(b) at some time during a period of two or more days,
it is to be taken for the purposes of th is section to have been committed on the
last of those days.
(9) Before the coming into force of paragraph 180 of Schedule 7 to the Criminal
Justice and Court Services Act 2000, th e reference in subs ection (3)(a) to a
sentence of imprisonment, in relation to an offender under the age of 21 at the
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances10
time of conviction, is to be read as a reference to a sentence of detention in a
young offender institution.
9 Offence under section 6: relevant convictions
(1) In section 8 “relevant conviction” means—
(a) a conviction for an offence under—
(i) section 1 or 1A of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (offences
relating to offensive weapons),
(ii) section 139, 139A or 139AA of the Criminal Justice Act 1988
(offences relating to bladed articles and offensive weapons), or
(iii) section 6 of this Act,
(a “relevant offence”),
(b) a conviction in Scotland, Northern  Ireland or a member State other than
the United Kingdom for a civ ilian offence which would have
constituted a relevant offence if co mmitted in England and Wales at the
time of that conviction,
(c) a conviction for an offence under section 42 of the Armed Forces Act
2006 in respect of which the corresponding offence under the law ofEngland and Wales (within the meaning of that section) is a relevantoffence,
(d) a conviction for an offence under section 70 of the Army Act 1955,
section 70 of the Air Force Act 1955 or section 42 of the Naval Discipline
Act 1957 in respect of which the corresponding civilian offence (withinthe meaning of the Act in questi on) is a relevant offence, or
(e) a conviction for a member State service offence which would have
constituted a relevant offence if co mmitted in England and Wales at the
time of conviction.
(2) References in subsection (1) to a convicti on for an offence are to a conviction for
an offence regardless of when it was committed.
(3) In this section—
“civilian offence” means an offence other than—
(a) an offence under an enactment mentioned in subsection (1)(c)
or (d), or
(b) a member State service offence;
“conviction” includes—
(a) in relation to an offence under section 42 of the Armed Forces
Act 2006, anything which by virtue of section 376(1) and (2) ofthat Act is to be trea ted as a conviction, and
(b) in relation to an offence under section 42 of the Naval Discipline
Act 1957 and a member State service offence, a finding of guiltin respect of the person;
“member State service offence” means an offence which was the subject of
proceedings under the law of a member State, other than the UnitedKingdom, governing all or any of the na val, military or air forces of that
State.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1)(c ) and (d), where the offence was committed
by aiding, abetting, counselling or procuring, it must be assumed that the actaided, abetted, counselled or proc ured was done in England and Wales.
(5) In this section—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive pr oducts and substances11
(a) in subsection (1)—
(i) in paragraph (b), for “Scotland, Northern Ireland or a member
State other than the United Ki ngdom” substitute “Scotland or
Northern Ireland”,
(ii) at the end of paragraph (c) insert “or”, and
(iii) omit paragraph (e) and the “or”  preceding that paragraph, and
(b) in subsection (3)—
(i) for the definition of “c ivilian offence” substitute—
““civilian offence” means an offence other than an
offence under an enactment mentioned insubsection (1)(c) or (d);”,
(ii) in the definition of “conviction ”, in paragraph (b) omit “and a
member State service offence”, and
(iii) omit the definition of “m ember State service offence”.
10 Search for corrosive substances: England and Wales
(1) Section 1 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984 (pow er of constable to
stop and search persons, vehicles etc) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (2),  after “any article to which subsection (8A) below applies”
insert “, any substance to which subsection (8AA) below applies”.
(3) In subsection (3),  after “any article to which subsection (8A) below applies”
insert “, any substance to which subsection (8AA) below applies”.
(4) In subsection (6), afte r “an article to which subsection (8A) below applies”
insert “, a substance to which subsection (8AA) below applies”.
(5) After subsecti on (8A) insert—
“(8AA) This subsection applies to any su bstance in relation to which a person
has committed, or is committing or is going to commit an offence undersection 6 of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (offence of having acorrosive substance in  a public place).
(8AB) In this section references to such a substance include an article which
contains such a substance.”
11 Search for corrosive substances: Scotland
(1) This section applies if a constable has reasonable grounds for suspecting that a
person—
(a) is carrying a corrosive substance, and
(b) has committed or is committing an offence under section 6.
(2) The constable may search the person without warrant, an d detain the person
for such time as is reason ably required to permit th e search to be carried out.
(3) If in the course of the search th e constable finds a substance which the
constable reasonably suspects to be a corrosive substance, the constable may
seize and retain the substance and an y article in which it is contained.
(4) If a constable detains a person under th is section the consta ble must inform the
person of the reason for doing so.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances12
(5) A person commits an offence if the person—
(a) intentionally obstructs a constable in the exercise of the constable’s
powers under this section, or
(b) conceals a corrosive substance from a constable acting in the exercise of
those powers.
(6) A person guilty of an offence unde r subsection (5) is liable on summary
conviction to a fine not exceeding level 4 on the standard scale.
(7) In this section “corrosive substance” has the same meaning as in section 6.
12 Search for corrosive substances: Northern Ireland
(1) Article 3 of the Police and Criminal Evidence (Northern Ireland) Order 1989 (SI
1989/1341 (NI 12)) (power of constable to stop and search persons, vehicles etc)is amended in accordance wi th subsections (2) to (5).
(2) In paragraph (2)(a), after “any article to which paragraph (9) applies” insert “,
any substance to which paragraph (9ZA) applies”.
(3) In paragraph (3), after “any article to which paragraph (9) applies” insert “, any
substance to which para graph (9ZA) applies”.
(4) In paragraph (6), after “an article to which paragraph (9) applies” insert “, a
substance to which para graph (9ZA) applies”.
(5) After paragraph (9) insert—
“(9ZA) This paragraph applies to any su bstance in relation  to which a person
has committed, or is committing or is going to commit an offence undersection 6 of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (offence of having acorrosive substance in  a public place).
(9ZB) In this Article references to such  a substance include an article which
contains such a substance.”
(6) In Schedule 2A to the Po lice (Northern Ireland) Act 2003 (powers and duties of
community support officer), after paragraph 17 insert—
“Powers in relation to corrosive substances
17A A CSO shall have the powers of a constable under Article 3 of the
1989 Order in relation to any su bstance to which paragraph (9ZA) of
that Article applies.”
Consequential amendments relating to corrosive products and substances
13 Consequential amendments relating to corrosive products and substances
(1) In section 1ZA(1)(a) of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (o ffence under section
1: previous relevant convictions)—
(a) omit the “or” at the end of sub-paragraph (i), and
(b) at the end of sub-para graph (ii) insert “or
(iii) section 6 of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019,”.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive pr oducts and substances13
(2) In section 37(1A) of the Mental Health  Act 1983 (powers of courts to order
hospital admission or guardianship: effe ct of provisions requiring imposition
of appropriate custodial sentence)—
(a) omit the “or” at the en d of paragraph (c), and
(b) at the end of paragraph (d) insert “or
(e) under section 8(2) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019
(minimum sentences in certain cases of possession of acorrosive substance),”.
(3) In section 36(2)(b) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (review of sentencing in case
of failure to impose appr opriate custodial sentence)—
(a) omit the “or” at the end of sub-paragraph (iii), and
(b) at the end of sub-paragraph (iv) insert “; or
(v) section 8(2) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019.”
(4) In section 139AZA(1)(a) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (offences under
sections 139 and 139A: previous relevant convictions)—
(a) omit the “or” at the end of sub-paragraph (i), and
(b) at the end of sub-para graph (ii) insert “or
(iii) section 6 of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019,”.
(5) In Schedule 9 to the Criminal Procedur e (Scotland) Act 1995 (certificates as to
proof of certain routine matters) at the end insert—
(6) In section 12(1A) of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000
(provisions preventing the making of an order for absolute or conditional
discharge), after paragraph (f) insert—
“(g) section 8(2) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019.”“The Offensive
Weapons Act 2019
Sections 1(1), 3(2)
and (3) and 4(4)(offences relatingto sale anddelivery ofcorrosiveproducts)A person
authorised to doso by the ScottishMinistersIn relation to any particular
product which is identifiedin the certificate— (a) thename and ChemicalAbstracts Registry numberof that product, or (b) thename and ChemicalAbstracts Registry numberof a substance contained inthat product and theconcentration of thatsubstance in that product.
Section 6(1)
(offence of havingcorrosivesubstance in apublic place)A person
authorised to doso by the ScottishMinistersThat the particular
substance identified in thecertificate is a corrosivesubstance within themeaning of section 6(9) ofthe Offensive Weapons Act2019.”
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 1 — Corrosive products and substances14
(7) In section 144 of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (reduction in sentences for guilty
pleas)—
(a) in subsection (3), at the end insert—
“section 8(2) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019.”, and
(b) in subsection (5), at the end insert—
“section 8(2) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019.”
PART 2
KNIFE CRIME  PREVENTION  ORDERS
Knife crime prevention orders made  otherwise than on conviction
14 Knife crime prevention order made otherwise than on conviction
(1) A court may make a knife crime preventi on order under this section in respect
of a person aged 12 or over (the “defen dant”) if the follow ing conditions are
met.
(2) The first condition is that a person has, by complaint to the court, applied for a
knife crime prevention order under this section in accordance with section 15.
(3) The second condition is that the court is satisfied on the balance of probabilities
that, on at least two occasions in the relevant period, the defendant had abladed article with them without good reason or lawful authority—
(a) in a public place in England and Wales,
(b) on school premises, or
(c) on further education premises.
(4) In subsection (3) “the relevant period” means the period of two years ending
with the day on which the order is made; but an event may be taken into
account for the purposes of that subsecti on only if it occurred after the coming
into force of this section.
(5) Without prejudice to the generality of subsection (3), a pe rson has good reason
for having a bladed article with them in a place mentioned in that subsection ifthe person has the article with them in that place—
(a) for use at work,
(b) for educational purposes,
(c) for religious reasons, or
(d) as part of any national costume.
(6) The third condition is that the court thinks that it is necessary to make the
order—
(a) to protect the public in Englan d and Wales from the risk of harm
involving a bladed article,
(b) to protect any particular members of the public in England and Wales
(including the defendant) from such risk, or
(c) to prevent the defendant from co mmitting an offence involving a
bladed article.
(7) A knife crime prevention  order under this  section is an order which, for a
purpose mentioned in  subsection (6)— 
(a) requires the defendant to do anything described in the order;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders15
(b) prohibits the defendant from doin g anything described in the order.
(8) See also—
(a) section 21 (which makes further provision about the requirements and
prohibitions which may be imposed by a knife crime prevention order
under this section),
(b) section 22 (which makes further provision about the inclusion of
requirements in a knife crime preven tion order under this section), and
(c) section 23 (which makes provision about the duration of a knife crime
prevention order under this section).
(9) Section 127 of the Magist rates’ Courts Act 1980 (time limits) does not apply to
a complaint under this section.
(10) In this section—
“court”—
(a) in the case of a defendant who is under the age of 18, means a
magistrates’ court which is a youth court, and
(b) in any other case, means a magistrates’ court which is not a
youth court;
“further education premises” means land used solely for the purposes
of—
(a) an institution within the further education sector (within the
meaning of section 91 of the Further and Higher Education Act1992), or
(b) a 16 to 19 Academy (within the meaning of section 1B of the
Academies Act 2010),
excluding any land occupied solely as a dwelling by a person employed
at the institution or the 16 to 19 Academy;
“public place” includes any place to which, at the time in question, the
public have or are permitted access,  whether on payment or otherwise;
“school premises” means any land us ed for the purposes of a school,
excluding any land occupied solely as a dwelling by a person employed
at the school; and “school” has the meaning given by section 4 of the
Education Act 1996.
15 Requirements for applicatio n for order under section 14
(1) An application for a knife crime prev ention order under section 14 may be
made only by—
(a) a relevant chief officer of police,
(b) the chief constable of the Br itish Transport Police Force, or
(c) the chief constable of th e Ministry of Defence Police.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(a) a ch ief officer of police is a relevant chief
officer of police in relation to an appl ication for a knife crime prevention order
in respect of a defendant if—
(a) the defendant lives in the chief officer’s police area, or
(b) the chief officer believes that the de fendant is in, or is intending to come
to, the chief officer’s police area.
(3) An application for a knife crime preven tion order under sect ion 14 made by a
chief officer of police for a police area may be made only to a court acting for a
local justice area that includes any part of that police area.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders16
(4) Subsections (5) and (6) a pply if a person proposes to apply for a knife crime
prevention order under section 14  in respect of a defendant who—
(a) is under the age of 18, and
(b) will be under that age when the application is made.
(5) Before making the application the person must consult the youth offending
team established under section 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act 1998 in whosearea it appears to the person that the defendant lives.
(6) If it appears to the person that the defendant lives in the area of two or more
youth offending teams, the obligation in  subsection (5) is to consult such of
those teams as the pers on thinks appropriate.
16 Application without notice
(1) An application for a knife crime prev ention order under section 14 may be
made without the applicant giving notice to the defendant.
(2) Section 15(4) to (6) (consultatio n requirements) does not apply to an
application made without notice.
(3) If an application is made without notice the court must—
(a) adjourn the proceedings and make  an interim knife crime prevention
order under section 17,
(b) adjourn the proceedings without making an interim knife crime
prevention order unde r that section, or
(c) dismiss the application.
(4) If the court acts under su bsection (3)(a) or (b), the applicant must comply with
section 15(4) to (6) before the date of the first full hearing.
(5) In this section “full hearing” means a hearing of which notice has been given to
the applicant and the defendant in accordance with rules of court.
Interim knife crime prevention orders
17 Interim knife crime prevention order: application without notice
(1) Where an application for a knife crim e prevention order in respect of a
defendant is made without notice by virtue of section 16, the court may makean interim knife crime prevention order under this section in respect of the
defendant if the first and second conditions are met.
(2) The first condition is that the procee dings on the knife cr ime prevention order
are adjourned (otherwise than at a full hearing within the meaning of section16).
(3) The second condition is that the court thinks that it is necessary to make an
interim knife crime prevention  order under this section.
(4) An interim knife crime prevention or der under this section is an order
which imposes on the defendant such of the prohibitions that may be imposed
by a knife crime prevention order unde r section 14 as th e court thinks are
required in relation to the defendant.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders17
(5) An interim knife crime pr evention order under this section may not impose on
the defendant any of the requirements that may be imposed by a knife crime
prevention order under section 14.
(6) See also—
(a) section 21 (which ma kes further provision abou t the prohibitions which
may be imposed by an interim knife crime prevention order under this
section), and
(b) section 23 (which makes provisio n about the duration of an interim
knife crime prevention order under this section).
18 Interim knife crime prevention order: application not determined
(1) This section applies if—
(a) an application is made to a cour t for a knife crime prevention order
under section 14 in respect of a defendant,
(b) the defendant is notified of the a pplication in accordance with rules of
court, and
(c) the application is adjourned.
(2) The court may make an interim knife cr ime prevention order in respect of the
defendant if—
(a) the first or second condition is met, and
(b) the third condition is met.
(3) The first condition is that, by the complaint by which the application
mentioned in subsection (1) is made, the applicant also applies for an interimknife crime prevention order in respect of the defendant.
(4) The second condition is that, by comp laint to the court, the applicant for the
order mentioned in subsecti on (1) subsequently app lies for an interim knife
crime prevention order in respect of the defendant.
(5) The third condition is that the court th inks that it is just  to make the order.
(6) An interim knife crime prevention orde r under this section is an order which—
(a) imposes on the defendant such of the requirements that may be
imposed by a knife crime prevention order under section 14 as the courtthinks appropriate;
(b) imposes on the defendant such of the prohibitions that may be imposed
by a knife crime prevention order un der that section as the court thinks
appropriate.
(7) See also—
(a) section 21 (which makes further provision about the requirements and
prohibitions that may be imposed by  an interim knife crime prevention
order under this section),
(b) section 22 (which makes further provision about the inclusion of
requirements in an interim knife crime prevention order under this
section), and
(c) section 23 (which makes provisio n about the duration of an interim
knife crime prevention order under this section).
(8) Section 127 of the Magist rates’ Courts Act 1980 (time limits) does not apply to
a complaint under this section.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders18
Knife crime prevention orders made on conviction
19 Knife crime prevention order made on conviction
(1) This section applies where—
(a) a person aged 12 or over (the “defendant”) is convicted of an offence
which was committed after the coming into force of this section, and
(b) a court dealing with the defendant in  respect of the offence is satisfied
on the balance of probabilities that  the offence is a relevant offence.
(2) The court may make a knife crime pr evention order under this section in
respect of the defendant if th e following conditions are met.
(3) The first condition is that the prosec ution applies for a knife crime prevention
order to be made under this section.
(4) The second condition is that the court thinks that it is necessary to make the
order—
(a) to protect the public in Englan d and Wales from the risk of harm
involving a bladed article,
(b) to protect any particular members of the public in England and Wales
(including the defendant) from such risk, or
(c) to prevent the defendant from co mmitting an offence involving a
bladed article.
(5) A knife crime prevention  order under this  section is an order which, for a
purpose mentioned in  subsection (4)—
(a) requires the defendant to do anything described in the order;
(b) prohibits the defendant from doin g anything described in the order.
(6) See also—
(a) section 21 (which makes further provision about the requirements and
prohibitions that may be imposed by a knife crime prevention order
under this section),
(b) section 22 (which makes further provision about the inclusion of
requirements in a knife crime preven tion order under this section), and
(c) section 23 (which makes provision about the duration of a knife crime
prevention order under this section).
(7) The court may make a knife crime pr evention order under this section in
respect of the defendant only if it is made in addition to—
(a) a sentence imposed in respect of the offence, or
(b) an order discharging the offender conditionally.
(8) For the purposes of deciding whether to make a knife crime prevention order
under this section the court may consider  evidence led by the prosecution and
evidence led by the defendant.
(9) It does not matter whether the evidence would have been admissible in the
proceedings in which the defendant was convicted.
(10) For the purposes of this section an offence is a relevant offence if—
(a) the offence involved violence,
(b) a bladed article was used, by the defendant or any other person, in the
commission of the offence, or
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders19
(c) the defendant or another person  who committed the offence had a
bladed article with them wh en the offence was committed.
(11) In subsection (10) “violence”  includes a threat of violence.
20 Requirement to consult on application for order under section 19
(1) This section applies if the prosecution proposes to apply for a knife crime
prevention order under section 19  in respect of a defendant who—
(a) is under the age of 18, and
(b) will be under that age when the application is made.
(2) Before making the application, the prosecution must consult the youth
offending team established under sectio n 39 of the Crime and Disorder Act
1998 in whose area it appears to the prosecution that the defendant lives.
(3) If it appears to the prosecution that the defendant lives in the area of two or
more youth offending teams, the obligatio n in subsection (2) is to consult such
of those teams as the prosecution thinks appropriate.
Provisions of knife crime prevention order
21 Provisions of knife crime prevention order
(1) The only requirements and prohibitio ns that may be imposed on a defendant
by a knife crime prevention order are those which the court making the order
thinks are necessary—
(a) to protect the public in Englan d and Wales from the risk of harm
involving a bladed article,
(b) to protect any particular members of the public in England and Wales
(including the defendant) from such risk, or
(c) to prevent the defendant from co mmitting an offence involving a
bladed article.
(2) The requirements imposed by a knife crime prevention order on a defendant
may, in particular, have the effect of requiring the defendant to—
(a) be at a particular place between pa rticular times on particular days;
(b) be at a particular place between particular times on any day;
(c) present themselves to a particular  person at a place where they are
required to be between particul ar times on particular days;
(d) participate in particular acti vities between particular times on
particular days.
(3) Section 22 makes further provision ab out the inclusion of requirements in a
knife crime prevention order.
(4) The prohibitions imposed by a knife crime prevention order on a defendant
may, in particular, have the effect of prohibiting the defendant from—
(a) being in a particular place;
(b) being with particular persons;
(c) participating in pa rticular activities;
(d) using particular articles or havi ng particular arti cles with them;
(e) using the internet to facilitate or encourage crime involving bladed
articles.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders20
(5) References in subsection  (4) to a particular plac e or particular persons,
activities or articles include a place, pers ons, activities or articles of a particular
description.
(6) A knife crime prevention order whic h imposes prohibitio ns on a defendant
may include exceptions fr om those prohibitions.
(7) Nothing in subsections (2) to (6) affect s the generality of section 14(7) or section
19(5).
(8) The requirements or prohibitions wh ich are imposed on the defendant by a
knife crime prevention order must, so far as practicable, be such as to avoid—
(a) any conflict with the defendant’s religious beliefs, and
(b) any interference with the times, if  any, at which the defendant normally
works or attends any educational establishment.
22 Requirements included in knife crime prevention order etc
(1) A knife crime prevention order or in terim knife crime prevention order which
imposes a requirement on a defendant must specify a person who is to beresponsible for supervising compliance with the requirement.
(2) That person may be an individual or an organisation.
(3) Before including a requirement, the court must receive evidence about its
suitability and enforceability from—
(a) the individual to be specified under subsection (1), if an individual is to
be specified;
(b) an individual representing the or ganisation to be specified under
subsection (1), if an organi sation is to be specified.
(4) Before including two or more requir ements, the court must consider their
compatibility with each other.
(5) It is the duty of a person specified under subsection (1)—
(a) to make any necessary arrangements in connection with the
requirements for which the person has responsibility (the “relevant
requirements”);
(b) to promote the defendant’s complianc e with the relevant requirements;
(c) if the person consid ers that the defendant—
(i) has complied with all of the relevant requirements, or
(ii) has failed to comply wi th a relevant requirement,
to inform the appropriat e chief officer of police.
(6) In subsection (5)(c) “the appropri ate chief officer of police” means—
(a) the chief officer of police for the police area in which it appears to the
person specified under subsection (1) that the defendant lives, or
(b) if it appears to that person that the defendant lives in more than one
police area, whichever of the chief o fficers of police of those areas the
person thinks it is most appropriate to inform.
(7) A defendant subject to a requiremen t in a knife crime prevention order or
interim knife crime pr evention order must—
(a) keep in touch with the person spec ified under subsecti on (1) in relation
to that requirement, in accordance with any instructions given by thatperson from time to time, and
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders21
(b) notify that person of any change of the defendant’s home address.
(8) The obligations mentioned in subsecti on (7) have effect  as if they were
requirements imposed on the defendant by the order.
23 Duration of knife crime prevention order etc
(1) A knife crime prevention order or an  interim knife crime prevention order
under section 18 takes effect on the day on which it is made, subject to
subsections (6) and (7).
(2) An interim knife crime prevention orde r under section 17 takes effect when it
is served on the defendant, subject to subsections (6) and (7).
(3) A knife crime prevention order must specify the period for which it has effect,
which must be a fixed period of at least 6 months, and not more than 2 years,beginning with the day on  which it takes effect.
(4) An interim knife crime prevention orde r under section 17 has effect until the
determination of the application mentione d in subsection (1) of that section,
subject to section 27 (variation, renewal or discharge).
(5) An interim knife crime prevention orde r under section 18 has effect until the
determination of the application mentione d in subsection (1) of that section,
subject to section 27.
(6) Subsection (7) applies if a knife crim e prevention order or an interim knife
crime prevention order is made in respect of—
(a) a defendant who has been remanded  in or committed to custody by an
order of a court,
(b) a defendant on whom a custodial sentence has been imposed or who is
serving or otherwise subject to such a sentence, or
(c) a defendant who is on licence fo r part of the term of a custodial
sentence.
(7) The order may provide that it  does not take effect until—
(a) the defendant is re leased from custody,
(b) the defendant ceases to be su bject to a custod ial sentence, or
(c) the defendant ceases  to be on licence.
(8) A knife crime prevention order or an interim knife crime pr evention order may
specify periods for which particular proh ibitions or requirements have effect.
(9) Where a court makes a knife crime prev ention order or an interim knife crime
prevention order in respect of a defend ant who is already subject to such an
order, the earlier order ceases to have effect.
(10) In this section “cu stodial sentence” means—
(a) a sentence of imprisonment or an y other sentence or order mentioned
in section 76(1) of the Powers of Cr iminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2003,
or
(b) a sentence or order which corresp onds to a sentence or order within
paragraph (a) and which was impo sed or made under an earlier
enactment.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders22
Notification requirements
24 Notification requirements
(1) Subsection (2) applies if—
(a) a knife crime prevention order is made in respect of a defendant (other
than an order which replaces an interim knife crime prevention order),or
(b) an interim knife crime prevention  o r d e r  i s  m a d e  i n  r e s p e c t  o f  a
defendant.
(2) The defendant must notify the informat ion mentioned in subsection (3) to the
police within the period of  3 days beginning with th e day on which the order
takes effect.
(3) That information is—
(a) the defendant’s name on the day on which the notification is given and,
where the defendant uses one or more  other names on that day, each of
those names, and
(b) the defendant’s home address on that day.
(4) Subsection (5) applies to a defendant who is subject to—
(a) a knife crime prevention order, or
(b) an interim knife crime prevention order.
(5) The defendant must notify the informat ion mentioned in subsection (6) to the
police within the period of 3 days beginning with the day on which the
defendant—
(a) uses a name which has not previously  been notified to the police under
subsection (2) or this paragraph,
(b) changes their home address, or
(c) decides to live for a period of on e month or more at any premises the
address of which has not been notified to the police under subsection(2) or this paragraph.
(6) That information is—
(a) in a case within subsection (5)(a ), the name which has not previously
been notified;
(b) in a case within subsection  (5)(b), the new home address;
(c) in a case within subsection (5)(c),  the address at which the defendant
has decided to live.
(7) A defendant gives a notification  under subsection (2) or (5) by—
(a) attending at a police station in a police area in which the defendant
lives, and
(b) giving an oral notification to a police officer, or to any person
authorised for the purpose by the officer in charge of the station.
25 Offences relati ng to notification
(1) A person commits an offence if the person—
(a) fails, without reasonable excuse, to comply with section 24(2) or (5), or
(b) notifies to the police, in purported compliance with section 24(2) or (5),
any information which the pe rson knows to be false.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders23
(2) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12
months, to a fine or to both;
(b) on conviction on indictment, to im prisonment for a term not exceeding
2 years, to a fine or to both.
(3) In relation to an offence committed be fore the coming into force of section
154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (maximum sentence that may beimposed on summary conviction of offenc e triable either way) the reference in
section (2)(a) to 12 months is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(4) A person commits an offe nce under subsection (1)(a) on the day on which the
person first fails, without reasonable ex cuse, to comply with section 24(2) or
(5).
(5) The person continues to commit the offence throughout any period during
which the failure continues.
(6) But the person may not be prosecuted more than once in respect of the same
offence.
(7) Proceedings for an offence under this  section may be commenced in any court
having jurisdiction in any place wher e the person charged with the offence
lives or is found.
Supplementary provisions
26 Review of knife crime prevention order
(1) This section applies where a court has made a knife crime prevention order in
respect of a defendant.
(2) The court may order the applicant an d the defendant to attend one or more
review hearings on a specified date or dates.
(3) Subsection (4) applies if any requirem ent or prohibition imposed by the knife
crime prevention order is to  have effect after the end of the period of 1 year
beginning with the day on wh ich the order takes effect.
(4) The court must order the applicant and the defendant to attend a review
hearing on a specified date within the last 4 weeks of the 1 year period(whether or not the court orders them to attend any other review hearings).
(5) A review hearing under this sectio n is a hearing held for the purpose of
considering whether the knife crime pr evention order should be varied or
discharged.
(6) Subsections (7) to (9) of section 27 (variation, renewal or discharge) apply to the
variation of a knife crime prevention order under this section as they apply tothe variation of an order under that section.
27 Variation, renewal or discharge of knife crime prevention order etc
(1) A person within subsection (2) ma y apply to the appropriate court for—
(a) an order varying, renewing or discharging a knife crime prevention
order, or
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders24
(b) an order varying or discharging an interim knife crime prevention
order.
(2) Those persons are—
(a) the defendant;
(b) the chief officer of police for a po lice area in which the defendant lives;
(c) a chief officer of police who beli eves that the defendant is in, or is
intending to come to, the chief officer’s police area;
(d) if the application for the order wa s made by a chief officer of police
other than one within paragraph (b) or  (c), the chief o fficer by whom the
application was made;
(e) if the order was made on an applic ation by the chief constable of the
British Transport Police Force, that chief constable;
(f) if the order was made on an applic ation by the chief constable of the
Ministry of Defence Police, that chief constable.
(3) An application under subs ection (1) may be made—
(a) where the appropriate court is th e Crown Court, in accordance with
rules of court;
(b) in any other case, by complaint.
(4) Before a person other than the defendant makes an application under
subsection (1), the person must noti fy the persons consulted under section
15(5) or section 20(2).
(5) Before making a decision  on an application under subsection (1 ), the court
must hear—
(a) the person making the application, and
(b) any other person within subsec tion (2) who wishes to be heard.
(6) Subject as follows, on an a pplication under subsection (1)—
(a) the court may make such order va rying or discharging the order as it
thinks appropriate;
(b) in the case of an application under paragraph (a) of that subsection, the
court may make such order renewing the order as it thinks appropriate.
(7) The court may renew a knife crime preven tion order, or vary such an order or
an interim knife crime prevention or der so as to impose an additional
prohibition or requirement on a defendant,  only if it is satisfied that it is
necessary to do so—
(a) to protect the public in Englan d and Wales from the risk of harm
involving a bladed article,
(b) to protect any particular members of the public in England and Wales
(including the defendant) from such risk, or
(c) to prevent the defendant from co mmitting an offence involving a
bladed article.
(8) The provisions mentione d in subsection (9) have e ffect in relation to the
renewal of a knife crime prevention orde r, or the variation of a knife crime
prevention order or interim knife crime pr evention order so as to impose a new
requirement or prohibition, as  they have effect in rela tion to the making of such
an order.
(9) Those provisions are—
(a) section 21 (provisions of knife crime prevention order),
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders25
(b) section 22 (requirements included in knife crime prevention order etc),
and
(c) section 23 (duration of knife crime prevention order etc).
(10) The court may not discharge a knife cr ime prevention order before the end of
the period of 6 months beginning with the day on which the order takes effect
without the consent of  the defendant and—
(a) where the application under this se ction is made by a chief officer of
police, that chief officer,
(b) if paragraph (a) does not apply bu t the application for the order was
made by a chief officer of police, t hat chief officer and (if different) each
chief officer of police for an area  in which the defendant lives, or
(c) in any other case, each chief office r of police for an area in which the
defendant lives.
(11) In this section the “a ppropriate court” means—
(a) where the Crown Court or the Cour t of Appeal made the knife crime
prevention order or the interim kn ife crime prevention order, the
Crown Court;
(b) where an adult magistrates’ court made the order, that court, an adult
magistrates’ court for the area in which the defendant lives or, where
the application is made by a chief officer of police, any adultmagistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any part
of the chief officer’s police area;
(c) where a youth court made the orde r and the defendant is under the age
of 18, that court, a youth court for the area in which the defendant livesor, where the application is made by a chief officer of police, any youthcourt acting for a local justice area that includes any part of the chief
officer’s police area;
(d) where a youth court made the orde r and the defendant is aged 18 or
over, an adult magistrates’ court fo r the area in which the defendant
lives or, where the application is made  by a chief officer of police, any
adult magistrates’ court acting for a local justice area that includes any
part of the chief officer’s police area.
(12) In subsection (11) “adult magistrates’ court” means a magistrates’ court that is
not a youth court.
28 Appeal against knife crime prevention order etc
(1) A defendant may appeal to the Crown Court against—
(a) the making of a knife crime prev ention order unde r section 14 (order
made otherwise than on conviction), or
(b) the making of an interim knife crime prevention order.
(2) A person who applied for a knife crim e prevention order under section 14 or
an interim knife crime prevention or der may appeal to the Crown Court
against a refusal to make the order.
(3) A defendant may appeal against the making of a knife crime prevention order
under section 19 (order made on conviction) as if the order were a sentencepassed on the defendant for the offence.
(4) Where an application is made for an order under section 27 (variation, renewal
or discharge)—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders26
(a) the person who made the application may appeal against a refusal to
make an order under that section;
(b) the defendant may appeal against the making of an order under that
section which was made on the application of a person other than thedefendant;
(c) a person within subsection (2) of that section other than the defendant
may appeal against the making of an order under that section whichwas made on the application of the defendant.
(5) An appeal under subsection (4)—
(a) is to be made to the Court of A ppeal if the application for the order
under section 27 was made to the Crown Court;
(b) is to be made to the Crown Court in any other case.
(6) On an appeal under subsec tion (1) or (2), or an a ppeal under subsection (4) to
which subsection (5)(b) applie s, the Crown Court may make—
(a) such orders as may be necessary to  give effect to its determination of
the appeal, and
(b) such incidental and consequential orders as appear to it to be
appropriate.
29 Offence of breaching knife crime prevention order etc
(1) A person commits an offence if, without reasonable excuse, the person
breaches a knife crime prevention orde r or an interim knife crime prevention
order.
(2) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12
months, to a fine or to both;
(b) on conviction on indictment, to im prisonment for a term not exceeding
2 years, to a fine or to both.
(3) In relation to an offence committed be fore the coming into force of section
154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (maximum sentence that may beimposed on summary conviction of offenc e triable either way) the reference in
subsection (2)(a) to 12 months is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(4) Where a person is convicted of an offence under this section, it is not open to
the court by or before which the person is convicted to make, in respect of the
offence, an order for conditional discharge.
30 Guidance
(1) The Secretary of State may from time to time issue guidance relating to the
exercise by a relevant person of functi ons in relation to knife crime prevention
orders and interim knife crime prevention orders.
(2) In this section “relevant person” mean s a person who is capable of making an
application for a knife crime preventi on order or an interim knife crime
prevention order.
(3) A relevant person must have regard to any guidance issued under subsection
(1) when exercising a function to which the guidance relates.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders27
(4) The Secretary of State must arrange for any guidance issued under this section
to be published in such manner as the Secretary of State thinks appropriate.
31 Piloting
(1) The Secretary of State may exercise the power in section 70(1) so as to bring all
of the provisions of this Part into forc e for all purposes and in relation to the
whole of England and Wales only if the following conditions are met.
(2) The first condition is that the Secretary of State has brought some or all of the
provisions of this Part into force only—
(a) for one or more specified purposes, or
(b) in relation to one or more sp ecified areas in England and Wales.
(3) The second condition is that the Secretary of State has laid before Parliament a
report on the operation of some or all of the provisions of this Part—
(a) for one or more of those purposes, or 
(b) in relation to one or more of those areas.
(4) Regulations under section 70(1) which bring any provision of this Part into
force only for a specified purpose or in relation to a specified area may—
(a) provide for that provision to be in  force for that purpose or in relation
to that area for a specified period;
(b) make transitional or saving provis ion in relation to that provision
ceasing to be in force at the end of the specified period.
(5) Regulations containing provision by virtue of subsection (4)(a) may be
amended by subsequent regu lations under section 70(1) so as to continue any
provision of this Part in force for the specified purpos e or in relation to the
specified area for a further specified period.
(6) In this section “specified” means spec ified in regulations under section 70(1).
(7) References in this section to this Part do not include section 30 or this section
(which by virtue of section 70(5)(a) co me into force on the day on which this
Act is passed).
32 Consequential amendments
(1) In section 3(2) of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 (functions of the Director
of Public Prosecutions) after paragraph (ff) insert—
“(fg) to have the conduct of applications for orders under section 19
of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (knife crime prevention
orders made on conviction);”.
(2) In the Criminal Legal Aid (General) Regulations 2013 (SI 2013/9), in regulation
9 (criminal proceedings) after paragraph (ub) insert—
“(uc) proceedings under Part 2 of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019 in
relation to a knife crime preven tion order or an interim knife
crime prevention order;”.
(3) The amendment made by subsection (2) is without prejudice to any power to
make an order or regulati ons amending or revoking the regulations mentioned
in that subsection.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 2 — Knife crime prevention orders28
33 Interpretation of Part
(1) In this Part—
“applicant” means an applicant for a knife crime prevention order;
“bladed article” means an article to which section 139 of the Criminal
Justice Act 1988 applies;
“defendant”—
(a) in relation to a knife crime prevention order under section 14
(order made otherwise than on  conviction), has the meaning
given by subsection (1) of that section;
(b) in relation to a knife crime prevention order under section 19
(order made on conviction), has the meaning given bysubsection (1) of that section;
“harm” includes physical  and psychological harm;
“home address”, in relation to a defendant, means—
(a) the address of the defendant’s sole or main residence, or
(b) if the defendant has no such residence, the address or location
of a place where the defendant can regularly be found and, if
there is more than one such plac e, such one of those places as
the defendant may select.
(2) A reference in this Part to a knif e crime prevention order which is not
expressed as a reference to an order under section 14 or 19 is a reference to anorder under either of those sections.
(3) A reference in this Part to an interi m knife crime prevention order which is not
expressed as a reference to an order under section 17 or 18 is a reference to anorder under either of those sections.
P
ART 3
SALE AND  DELIVERY  OF KNIVES  ETC
34 Sale etc of bladed articles to persons under 18
(1) In section 141A of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (sale etc of bladed articles to
persons under 18), in subs ection (3) (articles to which the section does not
apply)—
(a) at the end of paragraph (a) insert “or”, and
(b) omit paragraph (b) and the “or”  at the end of that paragraph.
(2) In Article 54 of the Cr iminal Justice (Northern Ir eland) Order 1996 (SI 1996/
3160 (NI 24)) (sale of bladed articles to persons under 18), in paragraph (3)(articles to which the Article does not apply)—
(a) at the end of sub-paragr aph (a) insert “or”, and
(b) omit sub-paragraph (b) and the “or”  at the end of that sub-paragraph.
35 Defence to sale of bladed article s to persons under 18: England and Wales
(1) The Criminal Justice Act 1988 is amended as follows.
(2) In section 141A (sale of bladed articles to persons under 18) as that section has
effect in England an d Wales, in subsecti on (4), for “It” su bstitute “Subject to
section 141B, it”.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and delivery of knives etc29
(3) After section 141A insert—
“141B Limitations on defence to offe nce under section 141A: England and 
Wales
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) is charged with an offence under section
141A (sale of bladed articles to persons under 18), and
(b) the seller was not in the presen ce of the person (“the buyer”) to
whom the article to which the ch arge relates was sold at the
time of the sale.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1 )(b) the seller was not in the presence
of the buyer at the time of the sale if—
(a) where the seller is an individual, the seller or a person acting on
the seller’s behalf was not in th e presence of the buyer at that
time;
(b) where the seller is not an indi vidual, a person acting on the
seller’s behalf was not in the pres ence of the buyer at that time.
(3) The seller is not to be regarded as having proved that they took all
reasonable precautions and exercised all due diligence to avoid thecommission of the offence unless, as  a minimum, they prove that the
following conditions are met.
(4) Condition A is that, at the time the offence is alleged to have been
committed—
(a) the seller operated a system for checking that persons who
bought articles to which section 141A applied by the same or asimilar method of purchase to that used by the buyer were notunder the age of 18, and
(b) that system was likely to pr event persons under the age of 18
from buying such articles by that method.
(5) Condition B is that when the package containing the article was
dispatched by the seller, it wa s clearly marked to indicate—
(a) that it contained an article with a blade or which was sharply
pointed (as the case may be), and
(b) that, when finally delivered, it should only be delivered into the
hands of a person aged 18 or over.
(6) Condition C is that the seller took all reasonable precautions and
exercised all due diligence to ensure  that, when finally delivered, the
package would be delivered into the ha nds of a person aged 18 or over.
(7) Condition D is that the seller did no t deliver the package, or arrange for
its delivery, to a locker.
(8) Where the article to which section 141A applied was dispatched by the
seller to a place from which it was to be collected by the buyer or aperson acting on behalf of the buye r, references in subsections (5) and
(6) to the final delivery of  the article are to be re ad as its supply to the
buyer or a person acting on beha lf of the buyer from that place.
(9) In subsection (7) “locker” means a lockable container to which the
package was delivered with a view to  its collection by the buyer, or a
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and deli very of knives etc30
person acting on behalf of the buyer, in accordance with arrangements
made between the seller and the buyer.”
36 Defence to sale etc of bladed articles to persons under 18: Scotland
(1) The Criminal Justice Act 1988 is amended as follows.
(2) In section 141A (sale or letting on hire  of bladed articles to persons under 18)
as that section has effect in Scotland, in each of subsections (3 A) and (4), for “It”
substitute “Except where section 141C applies, it”.
(3) After section 141B (inserted by section 35(3)) insert—
“141C Defence to offence under section 141A where remote sale or letting 
on hire: Scotland
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the accused”) is charged with an  offence under
section 141A (sale or letting on hi re of bladed articles to persons
under 18), and
(b) the accused was not in the presence of the person (“the
recipient”) to whom the article to which the charge relates wassold or let on hire at the time of the sale or letting on hire.
(2) For the purposes of subsection  (1)(b) the accused was not in the
presence of the recipient at the time of the sale or le tting on hire if—
(a) where the accused is an indi vidual, the accused or a person
acting on the accused’s behalf was not in the presence of the
recipient at that time;
(b) where the accused is not an in dividual, a person acting on the
accused’s behalf was not in the pr esence of the recipient at that
time.
(3) It is a defence for the accused to sh ow that the conditions in subsections
(5) to (8) are met.
(4) The accused is to be taken to  have shown a matter mentioned in
subsections (5) to (8) if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matte r is adduced to raise an issue
with respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(5) Condition A is that, at the time the offence is alleged to have been
committed—
(a) the accused operated a system  for checking that persons who
bought or hired articles to which section 141A applied by thesame or a similar method of purchas e or hire to that used by the
recipient were not under the age of 18, and
(b) that system was likely to pr event persons under the age of 18
from buying or hiring such  articles by that method.
(6) Condition B is that when the package containing the article was
dispatched by the accused, it was clearly marked to indicate—
(a) that it contained an article with a blade or which was sharply
pointed (as the case may be), and
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and delivery of knives etc31
(b) that, when finally delivered, it should only be delivered into the
hands of a person aged 18 or over.
(7) Condition C is that the accused took all reasonable precautions and
exercised all due diligence to ensure  that, when finally delivered, the
package would be delivered into the ha nds of a person aged 18 or over.
(8) Condition D is that the accused di d not deliver the package, or arrange
for its delivery, to a locker.
(9) Where the article to which section 141A applied was dispatched by the
accused to a place from which it was to be collected by the recipient ora person acting on behalf of the recipient, references in subsections (6)and (7) to the final delivery of the article are to be read as its supply tothe recipient, or a person acting on  behalf of the recipient, from that
place.
(10) In subsection (8) “locker” mean s a lockable container to which the
package was delivered with a view to its collection by the recipient, or
a person acting on behalf of the recipient, in accordance witharrangements made between the accused and the recipient.”
(4) In section 172(4) (provisions which exte nd only to Scotland) after the entry for
section 141ZA insert—
“section 141C;”.
37 Defence to sale of bladed article s to persons under 18: Northern Ireland
(1) The Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (SI 1996/3160 (NI 24)) is
amended as follows.
(2) In Article 54 (sale of bladed articles to  persons under 18), in  paragraph (4), for
“It” substitute “Subject  to Article 54A, it”.
(3) After that Article insert—
“54A Limitations on defence to offence under Article 54
(1) This Article applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) is char ged with an offence under Article
54 (sale of bladed articles to persons under 18), and
(b) the seller was not in the presen ce of the person (“the buyer”) to
whom the article to which the ch arge relates was sold at the
time of the sale.
(2) For the purposes of paragraph (1)( b) the seller was not in the presence
of the buyer at the time of the sale if—
(a) where the seller is an individual, the seller or a person acting on
the seller’s behalf was not in th e presence of the buyer at that
time;
(b) where the seller is not an indi vidual, a person acting on the
seller’s behalf was not in the pres ence of the buyer at that time.
(3) The seller is not to be regarded as having proved that they took all
reasonable precautions and exercised all due diligence to avoid thecommission of the offence unless, as  a minimum, they prove that the
following conditions are met.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and deli very of knives etc32
(4) Condition A is that, at the time the offence is alleged to have been
committed—
(a) the seller operated a system for checking that persons who
bought articles to which Article 54 applied by the same or asimilar method of purchase to that used by the buyer were notunder the age of 18, and
(b) that system was likely to pr event persons under the age of 18
from buying such articles by that method.
(5) Condition B is that when the package containing the article was
dispatched by the seller, it wa s clearly marked to indicate—
(a) that it contained an article with a blade or which was sharply
pointed (as the case may be), and
(b) that, when finally delivered, it should only be delivered into the
hands of a person aged 18 or over.
(6) Condition C is that the seller took all reasonable precautions and
exercised all due diligence to ensure  that, when finally delivered, the
package would be delivered into the ha nds of a person aged 18 or over.
(7) Condition D is that the seller did no t deliver the package, or arrange for
its delivery, to a locker.
(8) Where the article to which Articl e 54 applied was dispatched by the
seller to a place from which it was to be collected by the buyer or aperson acting on behalf of the buyer, references in paragraphs (5) and
(6) to the final delivery of  the article are to be re ad as its supply to the
buyer or a person acting on beha lf of the buyer from that place.
(9) In paragraph (7) “locker” means a lockable container to which the
package was delivered with a view to  its collection by the buyer, or a
person acting on behalf of the buyer, in accordance with arrangementsmade between the seller and the buyer.”
38 Delivery of bladed products to residential premises etc
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) sells a blad ed product to another person (“the
buyer”), and
(b) the seller and the buyer are not in each other’s presence at the time of
the sale.
(2) The seller commits an offence if, for the purposes of supplying the bladed
product to the buyer, the seller delivers the bladed product, or arranges for its
delivery, to residential premises.
(3) The seller commits an offence if, for the purposes of supplying the bladed
product to the buyer, the seller delivers the bladed product, or arranges for its
delivery, to a locker.
(4) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b) a person (“A”) is not in the presence of
another person (“B”) at any time if—
(a) where A is an individual, A or a person acting on behalf of A is not in
the presence of B at that time;
(b) where A is not an individual, a person acting on behalf of A is not in the
presence of B at that time.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and delivery of knives etc33
(5) In subsection (2) “resid ential premises” means pr emises used solely for
residential purposes.
(6) The circumstances where premises are not residential premises for the
purposes of that subsection include, in  particular, where a person carries on a
business from the premises.
(7) In subsection (3) “locker” means a lockable container to which the bladed
product is delivered with a view to it s collection by the buyer, or a person
acting on behalf of the buyer, in accordance with arrangements made betweenthe seller and the buyer.
(8) A person guilty of an offenc e under this section is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to imprisonment for a
term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland or Northern Ireland, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months, to a fine notexceeding level 5 on the st andard scale or to both.
(9) In relation to an offence committed be fore the coming into force of section
281(5) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003, the reference in subsection (8)(a) to 51weeks is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(10) This section is subject to section 40 (defences).
39 Delivery of bladed products to persons under 18
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”) sells a blad ed product to another person (“the
buyer”),
(b) the seller and the buyer are not in each other’s presence at the time of
the sale and the seller is within the United Kingdom at that time,
(c) before the sale, the seller entered into an arrangement with a person
who is a body corporate by which th e person agreed to deliver bladed
products for the seller,
(d) that person was aware when they entered into the arrangement that it
covered the delivery of  bladed products, and
(e) that person delivers the bladed  product to residential premises
pursuant to that arrangement.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b) a person (“A”) is not in the presence of
another person (“B”) at any time if—
(a) where A is an individual, A or a person acting on behalf of A is not in
the presence of B at that time;
(b) where A is not an individual, a person acting on behalf of A is not in the
presence of B at that time.
(3) For the purposes of su bsection (1)(b) a person other than an individual is
within the United Kingdom at any time if the person carries on a business ofselling articles of any kind from premis es in any part of the United Kingdom at
that time.
(4) In subsection (1)(e) “residential prem ises” means premises used solely for
residential purposes.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and deli very of knives etc34
(5) The circumstances where premises are not residential premises for the
purposes of subsection (1 )(e) include, in particular , where a person carries on
a business from the premises.
(6) The person mentioned in subsection (1)(e) commits an offence if, when they
deliver the bladed product, they do not deliver it into the hands of a personaged 18 or over.
(7) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (6) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to a fine;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland or Northern Ireland, to a fine not
exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
(8) This section is subject to section 40 (defences).
40 Defences to offence under section 38 or 39
(1) It is a defence for a person charged wi th an offence under section 38 to prove
that they took all reasonable precau tions and exercised all due diligence to
avoid the commission of the offence.
(2) It is a defence for a pers on (“the seller”) charged with an offence under section
38(2) of delivering a bladed product to residential premises to prove that—
(a) at the time the offence is alleged to  have been committed, the seller had
procedures in place wh ich were likely to ensure that any bladed
product delivered by the seller to residential premises would be
delivered into the hands of a person aged 18 or over, and
(b) the seller took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due
diligence to ensure that the produc t to which the charge relates would
be delivered into the hands of  a person aged 18 or over.
(3) It is a defence for a pers on (“the seller”) charged with an offence under section
38(2) of arranging for the delivery of a bladed product to residential premises
to prove that—
(a) the arrangement required the person with whom it was made to have
procedures in place wh ich were likely to ensure that any bladed
products delivered to resident ial premises pursuant to the
arrangement would be deli vered into the hands of a person aged 18 or
over, and
(b) the seller took all reasonable precautions and exercised all due
diligence to ensure that the produc t to which the charge relates would
be delivered into the hands of  a person aged 18 or over.
(4) It is a defence for a person charged wi th an offence under section 38 to prove
that the bladed product was designed or manufactured for the buyer inaccordance with specifications provided by the buyer.
(5) It is a defence for a person charged wi th an offence under section 38 to prove
that—
(a) the bladed product was adapted for the buyer before its delivery in
accordance with specifications provided by the buyer, and
(b) the adaptations were made to enable  or facilitate the use of the product
by the buyer or its use for a particular purpose.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and delivery of knives etc35
(6) It is a defence for a person charged wi th an offence under section 38 to prove
that they reasonably believed that the buyer bought the bladed product for use
for relevant sporting purposes or for the purposes of historical re-enactment.
(7) It is a defence for a person charged in  England and Wales or  Northern Ireland
with an offence under section 39 to prove that they took all reasonable
precautions and exercised all due diligen ce to avoid the commission of the
offence.
(8) It is a defence for a person (“the accuse d”) charged in Scotland with an offence
under section 39 to show that—
(a) the accused believed the person into whose hands the bladed product
was delivered to be aged 18 or over, and
(b) either the accused had taken reason able steps to establish the person’s
age or no reasonable person coul d have suspected from the person’s
appearance that the person was under the age of 18.
(9) For the purposes of subsection (8)(b) , the accused is to be treated as having
taken reasonable steps to establish the person’s age if and only if—
(a) the accused was shown any of the documents mentioned in subsection
(10), and
(b) the document would have convinced a reasonable person.
(10) Those documents are any document bearing to be—
(a) a passport,
(b) a European Union phot ocard driving licence, or
(c) such other document, or a document of such other description, as the
Scottish Ministers may prescribe by order.
(11) In the application of this section to Scotland references to a person proving a
matter are to be read as references to a person showing a matter.
(12) A person is to be taken to have sh own a matter for the pu rposes of subsection
(8) or (11) if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(13) The appropriate national authority may by regulations provide for other
defences to an offence under section 38 or 39.
(14) In this section—
“the appropriate national authority” means—
(a) in relation to England and Wales, the Secretary of State,
(b) in relation to Scotland, the Scottish Ministers, and
(c) in relation to Northern Irelan d ,  t h e  D e p a r t m e n t  o f  J u s t i c e  i n
Northern Ireland;
“the buyer” has the same meaning as in section 38;
“historical re-enactment” means a presen tation or other event held for the
purpose of re-enact ing an event from the past or of illustrating conduct
from a particular time or period in the past;
“residential premises” has the sa me meaning as in section 38.
(15) For the purposes of this section a bl a d e d  p r o d u c t  i s  u s e d  b y  a  p e r s o n  f o r
relevant sporting purp oses if and only if—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and deli very of knives etc36
(a) the product is used by the person to participate in a competitive sport
involving combat betw een individuals, and
(b) use of the product is an integral part of that sport.
41 Meaning of “bladed product” in sections 38 to 40
(1) Subject to subsections (2) to (4), in sections 38 to 40 “bladed product” means an
article which—
(a) is or has a blade, and
(b) is capable of causing a serious injury  to a person which involves cutting
that person’s skin.
(2) In sections 38 to 40 so far as they apply to England and Wales, “bladed
product” does not include an article described in—
(a) section 1 of the Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959, or
(b) an order made by the Secretary of State under section 141A(3)(c) of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988.
(3) In sections 38 to 40 so far as they apply to Scotland, “bladed product” does not
include an article described in—
(a) section 1 of the Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959,
(b) an order made by the Secretary of State under section 141A(3)(c) of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988 wh ich applies to Scotland, or
(c) an order made by the Scottish Mini sters under section 141A(3)(c) of that
Act.
(4) In sections 38 to 40 so far as they apply to Northern Irel and, “bladed product”
does not include an article described in—
(a) Article 53 of the Criminal Justic e (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (SI
1996/3160 (NI 24)), or
(b) an order under Article 54 of that Order.
42 Delivery of bladed articles to persons under 18
(1) This section applies if—
(a) a person (“the seller”)  sells a bladed article to another person (“the
buyer”),
(b) the seller and the buyer are not in each other’s presence at the time of
the sale and the seller is outside the United Kingdom at that time,
(c) before the sale, the seller entered into an arrangement with a person
who is a body corporate by which th e person agreed to deliver bladed
articles for the seller,
(d) that person was aware when they entered into the arrangement that it
covered the delivery of bladed articles, and
(e) that person delivers the bladed ar ticle pursuant to that arrangement.
(2) For the purposes of subsection (1)(b) a person (“A”) is not in the presence of
another person (“B”) at any time if—
(a) where A is an individual, A or a person acting on behalf of A is not in
the presence of B at that time;
(b) where A is not an individual, a person acting on behalf of A is not in the
presence of B at that time.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 3 — Sale and delivery of knives etc37
(3) For the purposes of su bsection (1)(b) a person other than an individual is
outside the United Kingdom at any time  i f  t h e  p e r s o n  d o e s  n o t  c a r r y  o n  a
business of selling articles  of any kind from premises  in any part of the United
Kingdom at that time.
(4) The person mentioned in subsection (1)(e) commits an offence if, when they
deliver the bladed article, they do not de liver it into the hands of a person aged
18 or over.
(5) It is a defence for a person charged in  England and Wales or  Northern Ireland
with an offence under subsection (4) to  prove that they took all reasonable
precautions and exercised all due diligen ce to avoid the commission of the
offence.
(6) It is a defence for a person (“the accuse d”) charged in Scotland with an offence
under subsection (4) to show that—
(a) the accused believed the person in to whose hands the bladed article
was delivered to be aged 18 or over, and
(b) either the accused had taken reason able steps to establish the person’s
age or no reasonable person coul d have suspected from the person’s
appearance that the person was under the age of 18.
(7) For the purposes of subsection (6)(b),  the accused is to be treated as having
taken reasonable steps to establish the person’s age if and only if—
(a) the accused was shown any of the documents mentioned in subsection
(8), and
(b) the document would have convinced a reasonable person.
(8) Those documents are any document bearing to be—
(a) a passport,
(b) a European Union phot ocard driving licence, or
(c) such other document, or a document of such other description, as the
Scottish Ministers may prescribe by order.
(9) The accused is to be taken to have shown a matter mentioned in subsection (6)
if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matter  is adduced to raise an issue with
respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
(10) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (4) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to a fine;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland or Northern Ireland, to a fine not
exceeding level 5 on the standard scale.
(11) In this section “bladed article”—
(a) in relation to England and Wales, means an article to which section
141A of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies (as that section has effectin relation to England and Wales);
(b) in relation to Scotland, means an article to which section 141A of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies (as that section has e ffect in relation
to Scotland and disregarding subsection (3A) of that section);
(c) in relation to Northern Ireland, me ans an article to which Article 54 of
the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (SI 1996/3160 (NI24)) applies.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons38
PART 4
POSSESSION  ETC OF CERTAIN  OFFENSIVE  WEAPONS
43 Amendments to the definition of “flick knife”
(1) In section 1 of the Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959 (penalties for
offences in connection with dangerou s weapons), in subsection (1), for
paragraph (a) substitute—
“(a) any knife which has a blade which opens automatically—
(i) from the closed position to the fully opened position, or
(ii) from a partially opened position to the fully opened
position,
by manual pressure applied to a button, spring or other device
in or attached to the knife, an d which is sometimes known as a
“flick knife” or “flick gun”; or”.
(2) In Article 53 of the Cr iminal Justice (Northern Ir eland) Order 1996 (SI 1996/
3160 (NI 24)) (manufacture or sale etc of certain knives), in paragraph (1), for
the first sub-paragr aph (a) substitute—
“(a) any knife which has a blade which opens automatically—
(i) from the closed position to the fully opened position, or
(ii) from a partially opened position to the fully opened
position,
by manual pressure applied to a button, spring or other device
in or attached to the knife, an d which is sometimes known as a
“flick knife” or “flick gun”; or”.
44 Prohibition on the possession of certain dangerous knives
(1) Section 1 of the Restriction of Offe nsive Weapons Act 1959 (penalties for
offences in connection with dangerou s weapons) is amended in accordance
with subsection s (2) to (4).
(2) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) Any person who possesses any knif e of a kind descri bed in subsection
(1) is guilty of an offence.
(1B) A person guilty of an offence under subsection (1A) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or toboth;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 6 months, to a fine not exceeding level 4 on thestandard scale or to both.
( 1 C ) I n  r e l a t i o n  t o  a n  o f f e n c e  c o m m i t ted before the coming into force of
section 281(5) of the Criminal Just ice Act 2003, subsection (1B)(a) has
effect as if the reference to 51 weeks were to 6 months.”
(3) In subsection (2), for “any such kn ife as is described in the foregoing
subsection” substitute “any knife of a kind described in  subsection (1)”.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons39
(4) After subsection (2) insert—
“(3) It is a defence for a person charged in respect of any conduct of that
person relating to a knife of a kind described in  subsection (1)—
(a) with an offence under subsection (1), or
(b) with an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of the Customs and
Excise Management Act 1979,
to show that the conduct was only for the purposes of making the knife
available to a museum or gallery to which this subsection applies.
(4) It is a defence for a person char ged with an offenc e under subsection
(1A) to show that they possessed the knife only in their capacity as theoperator of, or as a person acting on behalf of, a museum or gallery.
(5) If the operator of, or a person acti ng on behalf of, a museum or gallery
to which this subsection applies is  charged with hiring or lending a
knife of a kind described in subsecti on (1), it is a defence for them to
show that they had reasonable grou nds for believing that the person to
whom they lent or hire d it would use it only for cultural, artistic or
educational purposes.
(6) Subsection (3) or (5) applies to a mu seum or gallery only if it does not
distribute profits.
(7) In this section “museum or gallery”  includes any institution which has
as its purpose, or one of its purp oses, the preserva tion, display and
interpretation of material of historical, artistic or scientific interest andgives the public access to it.
(8) A person is to be taken to have shown a matter mentioned in subsection
(3), (4) or (5) if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matte r is adduced to raise an issue
with respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.”
(5) Article 53 of the Criminal Justice (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (SI 1996/3160
(NI 24)) (manufacture or sale etc of certain knives) is amended in accordancewith subsection s (6) and (7).
(6) The existing text becomes paragraph (1).
(7) After that paragraph insert—
“(2) Any person who possesses any knif e of a kind described in paragraph
(1) is guilty of an offence.
(3) A person guilty of an offenc e under paragraph (2) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 12 months, to a fine not exceeding the statutorymaximum or to both;
(b) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 4 years, to a fine or to both.
(4) It is a defence for a person charged in respect of any conduct of that
person relating to a knife of a kind  described in paragraph (1) with an
offence under paragraph (1) to show that the conduct was only for the
purposes of making the knife availabl e to a museum or gallery to which
this paragraph applies.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons40
(5) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under paragraph (2)
to show that they possessed the kn ife only in their capacity as the
operator of, or as a person acting on behalf of, a museum or gallery.
(6) If the operator of, or a person acti ng on behalf of, a museum or gallery
to which this paragraph applies is charged with hiring or lending aknife of a kind described in paragrap h (1), it is a defence for them to
show that they had reasonable grou nds for believing that the person to
whom they lent or hire d it would use it only for cultural, artistic or
educational purposes.
(7) Paragraph (4) or (6) applies to a mu seum or gallery only if it does not
distribute profits.
(8) In this Article “museum or gallery”  includes any institution which has
as its purpose, or one of its purp oses, the preserva tion, display and
interpretation of material of historical, artistic or scientific interest andgives the public access to it.
(9) A person is to be taken to have shown a matter mentioned in paragraph
(4), (5) or (6) if—
(a) sufficient evidence of the matte r is adduced to raise an issue
with respect to it, and
(b) the contrary is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.”
45 Prohibition on the possession of offe nsive weapons on further education 
premises
(1) Section 139A of the Criminal Justic e Act 1988 (offence of having offensive
weapon on school premises) is amended in accordance with  subsections (2) to
(7).
(2) In the heading, for “school premis es” substitute “education premises”.
(3) In subsection (1), after “school pr emises” insert “or further education
premises”.
(4) In subsection (2), after “school pr emises” insert “or further education
premises”.
(5) For the subsecti on (5) that has effect in England and Wales and for the
subsection (5) that ha s effect in Northern  Ireland substitute—
“(5) A person guilty of an offence un der subsection (1) or (2) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 months or to a fine,or to both;
(b) on summary conviction in Nort hern Ireland, to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months or to a fine not exceeding thestatutory maximum, or to both;
(c) on conviction on indictment, to imprisonment for a term not
exceeding 4 years or to a fine, or to both.
(5ZA) In relation to an offence commit ted before the coming into force of
section 154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (maximum sentence thatmay be imposed on summary convicti on of offence triable either way)
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons41
the reference in subsection (5)(a) to 12 months is to be read as a
reference to 6 months.”
(6) For the subsection (6) that has effect in England and Wales and the subsection
(6) that has effect in No rthern Ireland substitute—
“(6) In this section and section 139B “school premises” means land used for
the purposes of a school, excluding any land occupied solely as adwelling by a person employed at  the school; and “school” has the
meaning given by—
(a) in relation to land in England and Wales, section 4 of the
Education Act 1996;
(b) in relation to land in Northe rn Ireland, Article 2(2) of the
Education and Librar ies (Northern Ireland) Order 1986 (SI
1986/594 (NI 3)).”
(7) After subsection (6) insert— 
“(6A) In this section and section 139B “further education premises” means—
(a) in relation to England and Wa les, land used solely for the
purposes of—
(i) an institution within the further education sector
(within the meaning of section 91 of the Further andHigher Education Act 1992), or
(ii) a 16 to 19 Academy (within the meaning of section 1B of
the Academies Act 2010),
excluding any land occupied sole ly as a dwelling by a person
employed at the institution or the 16 to 19 Academy;
(b) in relation to Northern Irel and, land used solely for the
purposes of an institution of  further education within the
meaning of Article 2 of the Further Education (Northern
Ireland) Order 1997 (SI 1997/1772 (NI 15)) excluding any lando c c u p i e d  s o l e l y  a s  a  d w e l l i n g  b y  a  p e r s o n  e m p l o y e d  a t  t h einstitution.”
(8) In section 139B(1) of the Criminal Justic e Act 1988 (power of entry to search for
offensive weapons) after “school prem ises” insert “or further education
premises”.
46 Prohibition on the possession of offensive weapons
(1) Section 141 of the Criminal Justice Ac t 1988 (offensive weapons) is amended in
accordance with subsections (2) to (16).
(2) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) Any person who possesses a weapon to which this section applies in
private is guilty of an offence and liable—
(a) on summary conviction in England and Wales, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or toboth;
(b) on summary conviction in Scotland, to imprisonment for a term
not exceeding 6 months, to a fine not exceeding level 5 on thestandard scale or to both;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons42
(c) on summary conviction in Nort hern Ireland, to imprisonment
for a term not exceeding 12 months, to a fine not exceeding thestatutory maximum or to both;
(d) on conviction on indictment in Northern Ireland, to
imprisonment for a term not exceeding 4 years, to a fine or toboth.
(1B) In relation to an offence commit ted before the coming into force of
section 281(5) of the Criminal Just ice Act 2003, subsec tion (1A)(a) has
effect as if the reference to 51 weeks were to 6 months.
(1C) For the purposes of subsection (1 A )  a s  i t  h a s  e f f e c t  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o
England and Wales, a person possesses a weapon to which this sectionapplies in private if the person po ssesses the weapon in a place other
than—
(a) a public place,
(b) school premises,
(c) further education premises, or
(d) a prison.
(1D) For the purposes of subsection (1 A )  a s  i t  h a s  e f f e c t  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o
Scotland, a person possesses a weapon to which this section applies inprivate if the person possesses th e weapon on domestic premises.
(1E) For the purposes of subsection (1 A )  a s  i t  h a s  e f f e c t  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o
Northern Ireland, a person possesses a weapon to which this sectionapplies in private if the person po ssesses the weapon in a place other
than—
(a) a public place,
(b) school premises, or
(c) further education premises.
(1F) In subsections (1C) to (1E)—
“domestic premises” means prem ises occupied as a private
dwelling (including any stair,  passage, garden, yard, garage,
outhouse or other appu rtenance of such premises which is not
used in common by the occupants of more than one suchdwelling);
“further education premises”, in  relation to England and Wales,
means land used solely for the purposes of—
(a) an institution within the further education sector
(within the meaning of section 91 of the Further andHigher Education Act 1992), or
(b) a 16 to 19 Academy (within the meaning of section 1B of
the Academies Act 2010),
excluding any land occupied sole ly as a dwelling by a person
employed at the institution or the 16 to 19 Academy;
“further education premises”, in  relation to Northern Ireland,
means land used solely for the purposes of an institution offurther education within the meaning of Article 2 of the FurtherEducation (Northern Ir eland) Order 1997 (SI 1997/1772 (NI 15))
excluding any land occupied sole ly as a dwelling by a person
employed at the institution;
“prison” includes—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons43
(a) a young offender institution,
(b) a secure training centre, and
(c) a secure college;
“public place” includes any place to  which, at the time in question,
the public have or are permitte d access, whether on payment or
otherwise;
“school premises” means land used for the purposes of a school,
excluding any land occupied sole ly as a dwelling by a person
employed at the school; and “school” has the meaning given
by—
(a) in relation to land in Engl and and Wales, section 4 of the
Education Act 1996;
(b) in relation to land in Northe rn Ireland, Article 2(2) of the
Education and Libraries (Nor thern Ireland) Order 1986
(SI 1986/594 (NI 3)).”
(3) In subsection (5)(a), after “s ubsection (1)” insert “or (1A)”.
(4) After subsection (7) insert—
“(7A) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection
(1A) to show that the weapon in  question is one of historical
importance.”
(5) After subsection (8) insert—
“(8A) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection
(1A) to show that they possessed th e weapon in question only in their
capacity as the operator of, or as a person acting on behalf of, a museum
or gallery.”
(6) In subsection (9), for “If a person acting on behalf  of” substitute “If the operator
of, or a person acting on behalf of,”.
(7) After subsecti on (11) insert—
“(11ZA) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection
(1A) to show that they posses sed the weapon in question for
educational purposes only.” 
(8) In subsection (11A)(a) (a s inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006),
after “subsection (1)” insert “or (1A)”.
(9) After subsection (11A) (as inserted by the Violen t Crime Reduction Act 2006)
insert—
“(11AA) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection
(1A) to show that they possessed th e weapon in questi on only for one
or more of the purposes specified in subsection (11B).”
(10) In subsection (1 1C) (as inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006), for
“(8), (9) or (11A)” substitute “(7A), (8 ), (8A), (9), (11ZA), (11A) or (11AA)”.
(11) In subsection (11D) (as inserted by the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006), in
paragraph (a), after “subsect ion (1)” insert “or (1A)”.
(12) In subsection (11A) (as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons
(Scotland) Act 2007), after “subsection (1)” insert “or (1A)”.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons44
(13) After subsection (11A) (as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons
(Scotland) Act 2007) insert—
“(11AA) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection
(1A) to show that the person posses sed the weapon in question only for
one or more of the purposes sp ecified in subsection (11B).”
(14) In subsection (11F) (as inserted by the Custodial Sentences and Weapons
(Scotland) Act 2007), for “(8), (9) or (1 1A)” substitute “(7A), (8), (8A), (9),
(11ZA), (11A) or (11AA)”.
(15) After subsecti on (12) insert—
“(12A) An order under this section which has the effect that possession in
private of a weapon of a particular description is, or is to become, an
offence under subsection (1A) may make provision—
(a) enabling arrangements to be made for the surrender of
weapons of that description;
(b) as to the procedure to be followe d in relation to the surrender of
such weapons;
(c) for the payment of compensa tion in respect of weapons
surrendered in accordance with the arrangements;
(d) as to the requirements that mu st be met by a person making a
claim for compensation;
(e) as to the procedure to be followed in respect of a claim and for
the determination of a claim;
(f) enabling a person to exercise  a discretion in determining
whether to make a payment in response to a claim and the
amount of such a payment.”
(16) In subsection (14 )(a) after “subsection (1 )” insert “or (1A)”.
(17) In Article 29(1)(l) of th e Magistrates’ Courts (North ern Ireland) Order 1981 (SI
1981/1675 (NI 26)) after “141(1)” insert “or (1A)”.
(18) Subsection (19) applies if the subsec tions (11A) and (11B) which are inserted by
section 60(1)(b) of the Custodial Sentences and Weapons (Scotland) Act 2007into section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 are not in force whensubsection (2) comes into forc e in relation to Scotland.
(19) Until the coming into force of those subsections (11A) and (11B), section 141
has effect in relation to Scotland as if after subsection (11) there were inserted—
“(11A) Where a person is charged with an offence under subsection (1A) in
respect of conduct of the person relating to a weapon to which thissection applies, it is a defence to sh ow that the person’s conduct was for
the purpose only of making the weap on in question available for one or
more of the purposes spec ified in subsection (11B).
(11AA) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under subsection
(1A) to show that the person posses sed the weapon in question only for
one or more of the purposes specified in subsection (11B).
(11B) Those purposes are—
(a) the purposes of theatrical pe rformances and of rehearsals for
such performances;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons45
(b) the production of films (as defined in section 5B of the
Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988);
(c) the production of television programmes (as defined in section
405(1) of the Communications Act 2003).”
47 Prohibition on the possession of offensive weapons: supplementary
(1) The Schedule to the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) Order 1988
(SI 1988/2019) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) to (9). 
(2) In paragraph 1, after paragraph (r) insert—
“(s) the weapon sometimes known as a “zombie knife”, “zombie
killer knife” or “zombie slayer knife”, being a blade with—
(i) a cutting edge;
(ii) a serrated edge; and
(iii) images or words (whether on the blade or handle) that
suggest that it is to be used  for the purpose of violence.”
(3) In paragraph 1, after paragraph (s) insert—
“(t) the weapon sometimes known as  a “cyclone knife” or “spiral
knife” being a weapon with—
(i) a handle,
(ii) a blade with two or more cutting edges, each of which
forms a helix, and
(iii) a sharp point at the end of the blade.”
(4) In paragraph 2, after “subse ction (1)” insert “or (1A)”.
(5) In paragraph 3(a), after “section 141(1)” insert “or (1A)”.(6) In paragraph 4— 
(a) the existing text becomes sub-paragraph (1),
(b) in that sub-paragraph, in paragraph (a), after “section 141(1)” insert “or
(1A)”, and
(c) after that sub- paragraph insert—
“(2) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under
section 141(1A) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 in respect ofany conduct of that person relating to a weapon to whichsection 141 of that Act applies by virtue of paragraph 1(r) toshow that the person’s conduc t was for the purpose only of
participating in a permitted ac tivity of a kind mentioned in
sub-paragraph (1).”
(7) In paragraph 5A—
(a) the existing text becomes sub-paragraph (1),
(b) in that sub-paragraph—
(i) in paragraph (a), after “section  141(1)” insert “or (1A)”, and
(ii) in the words following paragraph (b) for “in religious
ceremonies” substitute “for religious reasons”, and
(c) after that sub- paragraph insert—
“(2) It is a defence for a person charged with an offence under
section 141(1A) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 in respect ofa weapon to which section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons46
1988 applies by virtue of paragraph 1(r) to show that the
person possessed the weapon for religious reasons only.”
(8) After paragraph 5A insert—
“5B (1) Sub-paragraph (2) applies to—
(a) a person charged with an offe nce under section 141(1) or (1A)
of the Criminal Justice Act 1988  in respect of any conduct of
the person relating to a curved sword, and
(b) a person charged with an offe nce under section 50(2) or (3) of
the Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 in respect ofany conduct of the person relating to a curved sword.
(2) It is a defence for the person to show that the person’s conduct was
for the purpose only of making th e sword available for presentation
by a Sikh to another person at a religious ceremony or otherceremonial event.
(3) It is a defence for a person char ged with an offence under section
141(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 of giving a curved sword to
another person to show that the person’s conduct consisted of the
presentation of the sword by a Sikh  to another person at a religious
ceremony or other ceremonial event.
(4) It is a defence for a person char ged with an offence under section
141(1A) of the Criminal Justice Ac t 1988 of possession of a curved
sword in private to show that—
(a) the person was a Sikh at the ti me the offence is alleged to have
been committed and possessed the sword for the purposeo n l y  o f  p r e s e n t i n g  i t  t o  a n other person at a religious
ceremony or other ceremonial event, or
(b) the sword was presented to the person by a Sikh at a religious
ceremony or other ceremonial event.
(5) In this paragraph—
“curved sword” means a weapon to which section 141 of the
Criminal Justice Act 1988 applie s by virtue of paragraph 1(r);
“Sikh” means a follower of the Sikh religion.”
(9) In paragraph 6, for “and 5A” substitute “, 5A and 5B”.
(10) The amendments made by subsections (2) to (9) are without prejudice to any
power to make an order under section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988amending or revoking the orde r mentioned in subsection (1).
(11) The Schedule to the Criminal Justic e Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) (Scotland)
Order 2005 (SSI 2005/483) is amended as follows.
(12) In paragraph 1, after paragraph (q) insert—
“(r) the weapon sometimes known as a “cyclone knife” or “spiral
knife” being a weapon with—
(i) a handle,
(ii) a blade with two or more cutting edges, each of which
forms a helix, and
(iii) a sharp point at the end of the blade.”
(13) In paragraph 2, after “sub section (1)” insert “or (1A)”.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons47
(14) The amendments made by subsections (12) and (13) are without prejudice to
any power to make an order under sectio n 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988
amending or revoking the order mentioned in subsection (11).
48 Surrender of prohibited offensive weapons
(1) The Secretary of State may make such arrangements as the Secretary of State
thinks fit to secure the orderly surre nder at designated police stations in
England and Wales of weapons the posses sion of which will become unlawful
by virtue of—
(a) section 44 (by itself or in combination with section 43), or
(b) section 46 (by itself or in  combination with section 47).
(2) The Scottish Ministers may make such arrangements as they think fit to secure
the orderly surrender at designated polic e stations in Scotland of weapons the
possession of which will beco me unlawful by virtue of—
(a) section 44 (by itself or in combination with section 43), or
(b) section 46 (by itself or in  combination with section 47).
(3) The Department of Justice in Northern Ireland may make such arrangements
as it thinks fit to secure the orderly su rrender at designated police stations in
Northern Ireland of weapons the possessi on of which will become unlawful by
virtue of—
(a) section 44 (by itself or in combination with section 43), or
(b) section 46 (by itself or in  combination with section 47).
(4) The chief officer of police for any area may designate any police station in the
chief officer’s area as being suitable for the receipt of—
(a) surrendered weapons, or
(b) surrendered weapons of a particular description.
(5) The Chief Constable of the Police Se rvice of Northern Ireland may designate
any police station in Northern Ireland as being suitable for the receipt of—
(a) surrendered weapons, or
(b) surrendered weapons of a particular description.
49 Payments in respect of surrendered offensive weapons
(1) Subsection (2) applies if the Secretar y of State makes arrangements for the
surrender of weapons under section 48(1).
(2) The Secretary of State must by regula tions provide for payments to be made in
respect of weapons which are surr endered in accordance with the
arrangements.
(3) Subsection (4) applies if the Scottish Ministers make arrangements for the
surrender of weapons under section 48(2).
(4) The Scottish Ministers must by regu lations provide for payments to be made
in respect of weapons which are su rrendered in accordance with the
arrangements.
(5) Subsection (6) applies if the Department  of Justice in Northern Ireland makes
arrangements for the surrender of weapons under section 48(3).
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 4 — Possession etc of certain offensive weapons48
(6) The Department of Justice in Northern Ireland must by regulations provide for
payments to be made in respect of weapons which are surrendered inaccordance with the arrangements.
(7) Regulations under subsection (2), (4) or (6) must provide that a payment may
only be made to a person making a claim which meets—
(a) condition A, and
(b) condition B or C.
(8) Condition A is that possession of th e weapon to which the claim relates will
become unlawful by virtue of section 44 (by itself or in combination with
section 43) or section 46 (by itself or in combination with section 47).
(9) Condition B is that th e person making the claim owned the weapon on the
relevant date.
(10) Condition C is that on or  before the relevant date the person making the claim
had contracted to acquire the weapon.
(11) The provision that may be made by regu lations under subsecti on (2), (4) or (6)
includes—
(a) other provision restricting eligibili ty for receipt of payments, including
provision restricting elig ibility to claims made in respect of weapons
surrendered within a period specified in the regulations;
(b) provision about the procedure to be  followed in respect of claims and
for the determination of claims (i ncluding any time within which
claims must be made, any evidence and other information to beprovided in support of a claim and th e burden of proof in relation to a
claim);
(c) provision enabling a person to ex ercise a discretion  in determining—
(i) whether to make a payment in response to a claim, and
(ii) the amount of such a payment.
(12) In this section “the relevant date”—
(a) in relation to a weapon to which section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act
1988 is to apply by virtue of section 47(3) or (12) of this Act, means 22ndJanuary 2019;
(b) in any other case, means 20th June 2018.
P
ART 5
THREATENING  WITH  OFFENSIVE  WEAPONS
50 Offence of threatening with offensiv e weapon etc in a public place etc
(1) Section 1A of the Prevention of Crim e Act 1953 (offence of threatening with
offensive weapon in public) is amended in accordance with subsections (2) and
(3).
(2) In subsection (1)—
(a) in paragraph (b), after “person” insert “(“A”)”, and
(b) in paragraph (c), for the words from  “there” to the end of the paragraph
substitute “a reasonable person (“B”) who was exposed to the same
threat as A would think that there was an immediate risk of physicalharm to B.”
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 5 — Threatening with offensive weapons49
(3) Omit subsection (2).
(4) Section 139AA of the Cr iminal Justice Act 1988 (o ffence of threatening with
article with blade or poin t or offensive weapon) is amended in accordance with
subsections (5) and (6).
(5) In subsection (1)—
(a) in paragraph (b), after “person” insert “(“A”)”, and
(b) in paragraph (c), for the words from  “there” to the end of the paragraph
substitute “a reasonable person (“B”) who was exposed to the same
threat as A would think that there was an immediate risk of physicalharm to B.”
(6) Omit subsection (4).
51 Offence of threatening with offens ive weapon etc on further education 
premises
(1) Section 139AA of the Cr iminal Justice Act 1988 (o ffence of threatening with
article with blade or point or offensive weapon) is amended as follows.
(2) After subsection (1) insert—
“(1A) A person is guilty of an offence if that person—
(a) has an article to which this se ction applies with them on further
education premises,
(b) unlawfully and intentionally threatens another person (“A”)
with the article, and
(c) does so in such a way that a reasonable person (“B”) who was
exposed to the same threat as A would think that there was an
immediate risk of physical harm to B.”
(3) After subsection (3) insert—
“(3A) In relation to further education pr emises this section applies to each of
these—
(a) an article to which section 139 applies;
(b) an offensive weapon within the meaning of section 1 of the
Prevention of Crime Act 1953.”
(4) In subsection (5)—
(a) at the appropriate place insert—
““further education premises” means land used solely for
the purposes of—
(a) an institution within the further education sector
(within the meaning of section 91 of the Furtherand Higher Education Act 1992), or
(b) a 16 to 19 Academy (within the meaning of
section 1B of the Academies Act 2010),
excluding any land occupied solely as a dwelling by a
person employed at the institution or the 16 to 19Academy;”;
(b) for the definition of “s chool premises” substitute—
““school premises” me ans land used for the purposes of a
school, excluding any land occupied solely as a dwelling
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 5 — Threatening wi th offensive weapons50
by a person employed at the school; and “school” has the
meaning given by section 4 of the Education Act 1996.”
52 Offence of threatening with an offe nsive weapon etc in a private place
(1) A person (“A”) commits an offence if—
(a) while A is in a private place, A unlawfully and intentionally threatens
another person (“B”) with an ar ticle or substance to which this
subsection applies, and
(b) A does so in such a way that there is an immediate risk of serious
physical harm to B.
(2) Subsection (1) applies to an article or substance if it is—
(a) an offensive weapon within the me aning of section 1 of the Prevention
of Crime Act 1953,
(b) an article to which section 139 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (offence
of having article with blade or po int in public place) applies, or
(c) a corrosive substance.
(3) In the application of subsec tion (1) to an article with in subsection (2)(a) or (b),
“private place” means a place other than—
(a) a public place,
(b) a place which is part  of school premises, or
(c) a place which is part of  further education premises.
(4) In the application of subsection (1) to a corrosive substance, “private place”
means a place other than a public place.
(5) For the purposes of subsection (1) ph ysical harm is serious if it amounts to
grievous bodily harm for the purposes of the Offences against the Person Act
1861.
(6) A person guilty of an offenc e under subsection (1) is liable—
(a) on summary conviction, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12
months, to a fine or to both;
(b) on conviction on indictment, to im prisonment for a term not exceeding
4 years, to a fine or to both.
(7) In relation to an offence committed be fore the coming into force of section
154(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 2003 (maximum sentence that may beimposed on summary conviction of offenc e triable either wa y), the reference in
subsection (6)(a) to 12 months is to be read as a reference to 6 months.
(8) In this section and section 53—
“corrosive substance” means a substa nce that is capable of burning
human skin by corrosion;
“further education premises” means land used solely for the purposes
of—
(a) an institution within the further education sector (within the
meaning of section 91 of the Further and Higher Education Act1992), or
(b) a 16 to 19 Academy (within the meaning of section 1B of the
Academies Act 2010),
excluding any land occupied solely as a dwelling by a person employed
at the institution or the 16 to 19 Academy;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 5 — Threatening with offensive weapons51
“public place” includes any place to which, at the time in question, the
public have or are permitted to have access, whether on payment or
otherwise;
“school premises” means land used for the purposes of a school,
excluding any land occupied solely as a dwelling by a person employed
at the school; and “school” has the meaning given by section 4 of the
Education Act 1996.
53 Search for corrosive substance on school or further education premises
(1) This section applies if a constable ha s reasonable grounds for suspecting that
an offence under section 52, as that se ction applies to corrosive substances, is
being or has been committed on sch ool premises or further education
premises.
(2) The constable may enter and search the premises and any person on them for
a corrosive substance.
(3) If in the course of a search under this  section a constable discovers a substance
which the constable has reasonable grounds for suspecting to be a corrosivesubstance, the constable may seize and retain it.
(4) The constable may use reasonable force,  if necessary, in the exercise of the
power of entry conferred by this section.
P
ART 6
FIREARMS
54 Prohibition of certain firearms etc: England and Wales and Scotland
(1) The Firearms Act 1968 is amended as follows.
(2) In section 5 (weapons subject to genera l prohibition), in su bsection (1), after
paragraph (af) insert—
“(ag) any rifle with a chamber from  which empty cartridge cases are
extracted using—
(i) energy from propellant gas, or
(ii) energy imparted to a spring or other energy storage
device by propellant gas,
other than a rifle which is  chambered for .22 rim-fire
cartridges;”.
(3) In section 5(1), for the “and” at the end of paragraph (b) substitute—
“(ba) any device (commonly known as a bump stock) which is
designed or adapted so that—
(i) it is capable of forming part  of or being added to a self-
loading lethal barrelled weap on (as define d in section
57(1B) and (2A)), and
(ii) if it forms part of or is added to such a weapon, it
increases the rate of fire of the weapon by using therecoil from the weapon to ge nerate repeated  pressure on
the trigger; and”.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 6 — Firearms52
(4) In section 5(2), after “including,” inse rt “in the case of weapons, any devices
falling within subsection (1)(ba) of this section and,”.
(5) In section 5(2A)(a), after “weapon” insert “, device”.
(6) In section 51A(1)(a) (min imum sentences for certain offences under section 5),
in each of sub-paragraphs  (i) and (iii), after “(af)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”.
(7) In Schedule 6 (prosecution and punish ment of offences) in Part 1 (table of
punishments)—
(a) in the entry for section 5(1)(a), (ab), (aba), (ac), (ad), (ae), (af) or (c), in
the first column, after “(a f)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”,
(b) in the entry for section 19, in the th ird column, for “or (af)” substitute “,
(af), (ag) or (ba)”, and
(c) in the entry for section 20(1), in th e third column, for “or (af)” substitute
“, (af), (ag) or (ba)”.
(8) The amendments made by subsecti on (6) apply only in relation to—
(a) an offence under section 5(1)(ag) or (ba) of the Firearms Act 1968 which
is committed after the coming into  force of subsection (6), and
(b) an offence under a provision listed in section 51A(1A) of that Act in
respect of a firearm specified in sectio n 5(1)(ag) or (ba) of that Act which
is committed after the coming into force of subsection (6).
55 Prohibition of certain firearms etc: Northern Ireland
(1) The Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/702 (NI 3)) is amended
as follows.
(2) In Article 45 (weapons subject to general prohibition), in paragraph (1), after
sub-paragraph (e) insert—
“(ea) any rifle with a chamber from which empty cartridge cases are
extracted using—
(i) energy from propellant gas, or
(ii) energy imparted to a spring or other energy storage
device by propellant gas,
other than a rifle which is cham bered for .22 rimfire cartridges;”.
(3) In Article 45(1), for the “and” at the end of sub-para graph (f) substitute—
“(fa) any device (commonly known as a bump stock) which is
designed or adapted so that—
(i) it is capable of forming part  of or being added to a self-
loading firearm, and
(ii) if it forms part of or is  added to such a firearm, it
increases the rate of fire of the firearm by using the recoilfrom the firearm to generate  repeated pressure on the
trigger; and”.
(4) In Article 2(2) (interpretation), in th e definition of “prohibited weapon” and
“prohibited ammunition”, afte r “including,” insert “in the case of weapons, any
devices falling within paragrap h (1)(fa) of that Article and,”.
(5) In Article 70(1)(a) (minimum sentence for certain offences), in each of heads (ii)
and (iv), after “(e)” insert “, (ea), (fa)”.
(6) In Schedule 5 (table of punishments)—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 6 — Firearms53
(a) in the entry for Article 45(1)(a), (aa), (b ), (c), (d), (e) and (g), in the first
column, after “(e)” insert “, (ea), (fa)”,
(b) in the entry for Article 61(1), in th e third column, for “or (e)” substitute
“, (e), (ea) or (fa)”, and
(c) in the entry for Article 62(1), in th e third column, for “or (e)” substitute
“, (e), (ea) or (fa)”.
(7) The amendments made by subsecti on (5) apply only in relation to—
(a) an offence under Article 45(1)(ea)  or (fa) of the Firearms (Northern
Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/702 (NI 3)) which is committed after the
coming into force of subsection (5), and
(b) an offence under a provision listed in Article 70(1A) of that Order in
respect of a firearm specified in Arti cle 45(1)(ea) or (fa) of that Order
which is committed after the coming  into force of subsection (5).
56 Consequential amendments re lating to sections 54 and 55
Schedule 2 contains consequential amendments relating to sections 54 and 55.
57 Surrender of prohibited firearms etc
(1) The Secretary of State may make such arrangements as the Secretary of State
thinks fit to secure—
(a) the orderly surrender at designated police stations of firearms the
possession of which will become unlawf ul by virtue of section 54 or 55;
(b) the orderly surrender at designated police stations or other places of
ancillary equipment.
(2) The chief officer of police for any area may designate any police station in the
chief officer’s area as being suitable for the receipt of—
(a) surrendered firearms or ancillary equipment, or
(b) surrendered firearms or ancillary equipment of a particular
description.
(3) The Chief Constable of the Police Se rvice of Northern Ireland may designate
any police station in Northern Ireland as being suitable for the receipt of—
(a) surrendered firearms or ancillary equipment, or
(b) surrendered firearms or ancillary equipment of a particular
description.
(4) In this section “ancillary equipment” has the meaning given by section 60(2).
58 Payments in respect of surrendered firearms other than bump stocks
(1) This section applies to firearms of the kind referred to in—
(a) the paragraph to be inserted into section 5(1) of the Firearms Act 1968
by section 54(2), or
(b) the sub-paragraph to be inserted  into Article 45(1 ) of the Firearms
(Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/702 (NI 3)) by section 55(2).
(2) This section applies if the Secretary of State makes arrangements under section
57 for the surrender of firearms  to which this section applies.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 6 — Firearms54
(3) The Secretary of State must by regula tions provide for payments to be made in
respect of such firearms which are surrendered in accordance with the
arrangements.
(4) Regulations under subsection (3) must provide that a payment may only be
made to a person making a claim which meets—
(a) condition A, and 
(b) condition B or C.
(5) Condition A is that possession of th e firearm to which the claim relates will
become unlawful by virtue  of section 54 or 55.
(6) Condition B is that the person making  the claim had and was entitled to have
the firearm in their posses sion on or immediately before 20th June 2018 by
virtue of a firearm certificate held by them or by virtue of being a registered
firearms dealer.
(7) Condition C is that—
(a) on or before 20th June 2018 the person making the claim had contracted
to acquire the firearm, and
(b) that person was entitled to have the firearm in their possession after
that date by virtue of a firearm certificate held by them or by virtue ofbeing a registered firearms dealer.
(8) The provision that may be made by regulations under subsection (3)
includes—
(a) other provision restricting eligibili ty for receipt of payments, including
provision restricting eligibility to claims made in respect of firearms
surrendered within a period specified in the regulations;
(b) provision about the procedure to  be followed (including any time
within which claims must be made an d the provision of information) in
respect of claims and for the determination of claims;
(c) provision enabling a person to ex ercise a discretion  in determining—
(i) whether to make a payment in response to a claim, and
(ii) the amount of such a payment.
59 Payments in respect of prohibited firearms which are bump stocks
(1) This section applies to firearms of the kind referred to in—
(a) the paragraph to be inserted into section 5(1) of the Firearms Act 1968
by section 54(3), or
(b) the sub-paragraph to be inserted  into Article 45(1 ) of the Firearms
(Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/702 (NI 3)) by section 55(3).
(2) This section applies if the Secretary of State makes arrangements under section
57 for the surrender of firearms  to which this section applies.
(3) The Secretary of State must by regula tions provide for payments to be made in
respect of such firearms which are surrendered in accordance with the
arrangements.
(4) Regulations under subsection (3) must provide that a payment may only be
made to a person making a claim which meets—
(a) condition A,
(b) condition B or C, and
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 6 — Firearms55
(c) condition D.
(5) Condition A is that possession of th e firearm to which the claim relates will
become unlawful by virtue  of section 54 or 55.
(6) Condition B is that the person maki ng the claim had the firearm in their
possession on or immediately before 20th June 2018.
(7) Condition C is that on or before 20th June 2018 the person making the claim
had contracted to acquire the firearm.
(8) Condition D is that the person making  the claim did not import the firearm into
the United Kingdom on or after 4th December 2017.
(9) The provision that may be made by regulations under subsection (3)
includes—
(a) other provision restricting eligibili ty for receipt of payments, including
provision restricting eligibility to claims made in respect of firearms
surrendered within a period specified in the regulations;
(b) provision about the procedure to  be followed (including any time
within which claims must be made an d the provision of information) in
respect of claims and for the determination of claims;
(c) provision enabling a person to ex ercise a discretion  in determining—
(i) whether to make a payment in response to a claim, and
(ii) the amount of such a payment.
60 Payments in respect of ancillary equipment
(1) The Secretary of State may by regulati ons provide for payments to be made in
respect of ancillary equipment of any de scription specified in the regulations.
(2) In subsection (1) “a ncillary equipment” means equipment, other than
prohibited ammunition, which—
(a) is designed or adapted for use in connection with fi rearms prohibited
by virtue of section 54 or 55, and
(b) has no practicable use in connection with any firearm which is not a
prohibited weapon.
(3) Regulations under subsection (1) must provide that a payment may only be
made to a person making a claim which meets—
(a) condition A, and
(b) where the claim is made in resp ect of ancillary equipment which is
ammunition, condition B.
(4) Condition A is that the person maki ng the claim had the ancillary equipment
to which the claim relate s in their possession—
(a) on or immediately before 20th June 2018, or
(b) after that date because they purchased it by virtue of a contract entered
into on or before that date.
(5) Condition B is that the possession of the ammunition by th e person making the
claim was, at all material times, lawful by virtue of a firearm certificate held by
them or by virtue of being a registered firearms dealer.
(6) Regulations under subsection (1) may re quire, as a condition of eligibility for
receipt of payments in respect of any equipment—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 6 — Firearms56
(a) the surrender (whether  to the police or any other person) of that
equipment in accordance with the regulations within a period specifiedin the regulations,
( b ) t h e  d i s p o s a l  o f  t h a t  e q u i p m e n t  b y  w a y  o f  s a l e  w i t h i n  a  p e r i o d  s o
specified, or
(c) either such surrender or such disp osal of the equipm ent within a period
so specified.
(7) The provision that may be made by regulations under subsection (1)
includes—
(a) other provision restricting eligibili ty for receipt of payments, including
provision restricting eligibility to claims made in respect of ancillary
equipment surrendered or disposed of within a period specified in theregulations;
(b) provision about the procedure to  be followed (including any time
within which claims must be made an d the provision of information) in
respect of claims and for the determination of claims;
(c) provision enabling a person to ex ercise a discretion  in determining—
(i) whether to make a payment in response to a claim, and
(ii) the amount of such a payment.
61 Conditions applying to certain fire arms: England and Wales and Scotland
(1) The Firearms Act 1968 is amended as follows.
(2) After section 27 insert—
“27A Conditions for storage etc of certain firearms
(1) This section applies to a firearm if it is a rifle from which a shot, bullet
or other missile, with kinetic energy of more than 13,600 joules at themuzzle of the weapon, can be discharged.
(2) The Secretary of State must by  rules under section 53 prescribe
conditions—
(a) subject to which a firearm certificate relating to a firearm to
which this section applies must be granted or renewed, and
(b) which impose requirements as to the storage of a firearm to
which this section applies and as to the security measures to be
taken when such a firearm is in transit.
(3) Before making rules under section 53  which prescribe conditions of the
kind mentioned in subsection (2) the Secretary of State must consultsuch persons likely to be affected by the rules as the Secretary of Stateconsiders appropriate.”
(3) In section 53 (rules fo r implementing the Act)—
(a) the existing text becomes subsection (1), and
(b) at the end of that subsection insert—
“(2) A statutory instrument containi ng (whether alone or with other
provision) rules under this se ction which prescribe conditions
of the kind mentioned in sectio n 27A(2) (conditions for storage
etc of certain firearms) is subject to annulment in pursuance ofa resolution of either House of Parliament.”
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 6 — Firearms57
62 Conditions applying to certai n firearms: Northern Ireland
(1) The Firearms (Northern Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/702 (NI 3)) is amended
as follows.
(2) In Article 6 (conditions), after paragraph (3) insert—
“(3A) Paragraphs (1) and (2) are subject to Article 6A (conditions for storage
etc of certain firearms) and re gulations under that Article.”
(3) After Article 6 insert—
“6A Conditions for storage etc of certain firearms
(1) This Article applies to a firearm if it is a rifle from which a shot, bullet
or other missile, with kinetic energy of more than 13,600 joules at themuzzle of the weapon, can be discharged.
(2) The Department of Justice must by regulations prescribe conditions—
(a) subject to which a firearm certificate relating to a firearm to
which this Article applies must be granted, and
(b) which impose requirements as to the storage of a firearm to
which this Article applies and as to the security measures to be
taken when such a firearm is in transit.
(3) If a firearm certificate is granted su bject to conditions prescribed under
paragraph (2), that certificate may not be varied so as to vary or revokethose conditions.
(4) Before making regulations unde r paragraph (2) the Department of
Justice must consult such persons likely to be affected by theregulations as the Department considers appropriate.”
(4) In Article 11 (variation of firearm certificate), after paragraph (1) insert—
“(1A) Paragraph (1) is subject to Arti cle 6A (conditions for storage etc of
certain firearms) and regula tions under that Article.”
63 Interpretation of Part
(1) Any expression used in this Part as it  applies in relation to England and Wales
and Scotland and which is defined in the Firearms Act 1968 has the samemeaning as in that Act.
(2) Any expression used in this Part as it  applies in relation to Northern Ireland
and which is defined in th e Firearms (North ern Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/
702 (NI 3)) has the same meaning as in that Order.
P
ART 7
ENFORCEMENT
64 Enforcement of offences relating to sale etc of offensive weapons
(1) A local weights and measures authority may enforce within its area a provision
listed in subsection (2).
(2) The provisions mentione d in subsection (1) are—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 7 — Enforcement58
(a) section 1(1) of the Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959 (penalties
for offences in connection with dangerous weapons),
(b) section 1 of the Crossbows Act 1987  (sale etc of crossbows to persons
under 18),
(c) section 141(1) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (offensive weapons),
(d) section 141A of that Act (sale etc of bladed articles to persons under 18),
(e) section 1 of the Knives Act 19 97 (unlawful marketing of knives),
(f) section 2 of that Act (publication of unlawful marketing material
relating to knives),
(g) section 1 of this Act (sale of corrosive products to persons under 18),
(h) section 3 of this Act (delivery of  corrosive products to residential
premises etc),
(i) section 4 of this Act (delivery of  corrosive products to persons under
18),
(j) section 38 of this Act (delivery of bladed products to residential
premises etc), 
(k) section 39 of this Act (delivery of  bladed products to persons under 18),
and
(l) section 42 of this Act (delivery of  bladed articles to persons under 18).
(3) For the investigatory powers avai lable to a local weights and measures
authority for the purposes of enforcing a provision listed in su bsection (2), see
Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015.
(4) Nothing in this section is to be co nstrued as authorising a local weights and
measures authority to bring procee dings in Scotland for an offence.
(5) In paragraph 10 of Schedule 5 to the Consumer Rights Act 2015 (duties and
powers to which Schedule 5 applies), at the appropriate place insert “section 64
of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019.”
65 Application of Regulatory Enforcement and Sanctions Act 2008
In Schedule 3 to the Regulatory Enforc ement and Sanctions Act 2008 (relevant
enactments for the pu rposes of relevant functions to which Parts 1 and 2 of that
Act apply) at the appr opriate places insert—
“Criminal Justice Act 1988, sections 141(1) and 141A”;
“Offensive Weapons Act 2019, sections 1, 3, 4, 38, 39 and 42”;“Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959, section 1(1)”.
P
ART 8
SUPPLEMENTARY
66 Guidance on offences relating to offensive weapons etc
(1) The Secretary of State may from time to time issue guidance about—
(a) section 1 of the Prevention of Crime Act 1953 (prohibition of the
carrying of offensive weapons withou t lawful authority or reasonable
excuse),
(b) section 1 of the Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959 (penalties for
offences in connection with danger ous weapons) as it has effect in
relation to—
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary59
(i) England and Wales, or
(ii) the importation of a knife to which that section applies into any
other part of the United Kingdom,
(c) section 139 of the Criminal Justic e Act 1988 (offence of having article
with blade or point in public place) as  it has effect in relation to England
and Wales,
(d) section 139A of that Act (offence of  having article with blade or point
(or offensive weapon) on educational  premises) as it has effect in
relation to England and Wales,
(e) section 141 of that Act (offensive weapons) as it has effect in relation to
England and Wales,
(f) section 141A of that Act (sale of bladed articles to persons under 18) as
it has effect in relation to England and Wales,
(g) section 141B of that Act (limitatio ns on defence to offence under section
141A: England and Wales),
( h ) a n y  o f  s e c t i o n s  1  t o  4  o f  t h i s  A c t  ( s a l e  a n d  d e l i v e r y  o f  c o r r o s i v e
products) as they have effect in  relation to England and Wales or
Scotland,
(i) section 6 of this Act (offence of ha ving a corrosive substance in a public
place) as it has effect in relation to England and Wales, or
(j) any of sections 38 to 42 of this Act (sale and delivery of knives etc) as
they have effect in relation to England and Wales.
(2) The Scottish Ministers may from time to time issue guidance about—
(a) section 1 of the Restriction of Offensive Weapons Act 1959 as it has
e f f e c t  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  S c o t l a n d  a n d  o t h e r  t h a n  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o  t h eimportation of a knife to which that section applies,
(b) section 141 of the Criminal Justice Ac t 1988 as it has effect in relation to
Scotland,
(c) section 141A of that Act as it has effect in relation to Scotland,
(d) section 141C of that Act (defence  to offence under section 141A where
remote sale or letting on hire: Scotland),
(e) section 6 of this Act as it has effect in relation to Scotland, or
(f) any of sections 38 to 42 of this Act as they have effect in relation to
Scotland.
(3) The Department of Justic e in Northern Ireland may from time to time issue
guidance about—
(a) Article 22 of the Public Order (Northern Ireland) Order 1987 (SI 1987/
463 (NI 7)) (carrying of offens ive weapon in public place),
(b) section 139 of the Criminal Justice Ac t 1988 as it has effect in relation to
Northern Ireland,
(c) section 139A of that Act as it has effect in relation to Northern Ireland,
(d) section 141 of that Act as it has effect in relation to Northern Ireland,
(e) Article 53 of the Criminal Justic e (Northern Ireland) Order 1996 (SI
1996/3160 (NI 24)) (manufacture or sale of certain knives),
(f) Article 54 or 54A of that Order (sale of bladed articles to persons under
18),
( g ) a n y  o f  s e c t i o n s  1  t o  4  o f  t h i s  A c t  a s  t h e y  h a v e  e f f e c t  i n  r e l a t i o n  t o
Northern Ireland,
(h) section 6 of this Act as it has effe ct in relation to Northern Ireland, or
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary60
(i) any of sections 38 to 42 of this Act as they have effect in relation to
Northern Ireland.
(4) A national authority who issues guidance under this section may from time to
time revise it.
(5) Subsection (6) applies if a national au thority proposes to issue guidance under
this section—
(a) on a matter on which the authorit y has not previously issued such
guidance, or
(b) which the authority considers to  be substantially different from
guidance previously issued under this section.
(6) Before the national auth ority issues the guidance, the authority must consult
such persons likely to be affected by it as the authority considers appropriate.
(7) A national authority must arrange for any guidance issued by the authority
under this section to be published in  such manner as the authority thinks
appropriate.
(8) This section does not permit a national  authority to give guidance to a court or
tribunal.
(9) In this section “national authority” means—
(a) the Secretary of State,
(b) the Scottish Ministers, or
(c) the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland.
(10) Until the coming into force of the repeal  of section 141(4) of the Criminal Justice
Act 1988 (ban on importation of weapons) by paragraph 119(2) of Schedule 7to the Policing and Crime Act 2009, this section has effect as if—
(a) subsection (1)(e) referred  to section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988
as it has effect in relation to—
(i) England and Wales, or
(ii) the importation of a weapon to  which that section applies into
any other part of the United Kingdom;
(b) subsection (2)(b) referred to that se ction as it has effect in relation to
Scotland and other than in relation to the importation of a weapon towhich that section applies, and
(c) subsection (3)(d) referred to that section as it has effect in relation to
Northern Ireland and other than in relation to the importation of aweapon to which that section applies.
67 Consequential amendments relating to armed forces
(1) Part 2 of Schedule 1 to the Armed Fo rces Act 2006 (criminal conduct offences
that may be dealt with at a summary hearing only with permission) isamended as follows.
(2) After paragraph 14 insert—
“14A An offence under section 1(1A) of the Restriction of Offensive
Weapons Act 1959 (possession of f lick knife, flick gun or gravity
knife).”
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary61
(3) After paragraph 16 insert—
“16A An offence under section 141(1A) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988
(possession of certain offensive weapons).”
(4) After paragraph 20 insert—
“21 An offence under section 1(1) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019
(sale of corrosive product to person under 18).
22 An offence under section 3(2) or (3) of the Offensive Weapons Act
2019 (delivery of corrosive product to residential premises or locker).
23 An offence under section 6(1) of the Offensive Weapons Act 2019
(possession of a corrosive su bstance in a public place).
24 An offence under section 38(2) or  (3) of the Offensive Weapons Act
2019 (delivery of bladed product to  residential premises or locker).”
68 Regulations and orders
(1) Any power or duty of the Secretary of State to make regulations under this Act
is exercisable by statutory instrument.
(2) A statutory instrument containing regulations under this Act made by the
Secretary of State may not be made unless a draft of the instrument has beenlaid before, and approved by a resolu tion of, each House of Parliament.
(3) An order made by the Scottish Ministers under section 1(5)(c), 4(8)(c), 40(10)(c)
or 42(8)(c) is subject to the negati ve procedure (see section 28 of the
Interpretation and Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010).
(4) Regulations made by the Scottish Ministers under section 40(13) or 49(4) are
subject to the affirmative procedure (see  section 29 of the Interpretation and
Legislative Reform (Scotland) Act 2010).
(5) Any power or duty of the Department of Justice in Northern Ireland to make
regulations or an order under this Act is  exercisable by statutory rule for the
purposes of the Statutory Rules (Nor thern Ireland) Order 1979 (and not by
statutory instrument).
(6) No regulations may be made by the Department of Justice under this Act
unless a draft of the regulations has been laid before, and approved by aresolution of, the Northern Ireland Assembly.
(7) Section 41(3) of the Interpretation Ac t (Northern Ireland) 1954 applies for the
purposes of subsection (6) in relation to the laying of a draft as it applies in
relation to the laying of a stat utory document un der an enactment.
(8) Regulations or an order under this Act—
(a) may make different prov ision for different cases;
(b) may make transitional, tran sitory or saving provision;
(c) may make incidental, supplementary or consequential provision.
(9) Subsections (2) and (8) do not apply to regulations or an order under section 70.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary62
69 Extent
(1) The following provisions of this Act extend to England and Wales, Scotland
and Northern Ireland—
(a) sections 1 to 4;
(b) section 6;
(c) subsection (4) of section 36, and subsection (1) of that section so far as
relating to subsection (4) of that section;
(d) sections 38 to 42;
(e) section 43(1);
(f) subsection (3) of section 44, and subs ection (1) of that section so far as
relating to subsection (3) of that section;
(g) subsection (4) of section 44, so far as  it makes provision in relation to an
offence under section 50(2) or (3) of the Customs and Excise
Management Act 1979, and subsection (1) of that section so far asrelating to that provisio n made by subsection (4);
(h) subsections (2) to (7) and (15) of section 46, and subsection (1) of that
section so far as relating to subsections (2) to (7) and (15) of that section;
(i) sections 48 and 49;
(j) sections 57 to 60;
(k) section 63;
(l) section 64(5);
(m) section 65;
(n) section 66;
(o) section 68;
(p) this section;
(q) sections 70 and 71;
(r) Schedule 1;
(s) paragraphs 1 to 6 of Schedule 2, and section 56 so far as relating to those
paragraphs.
(2) The following provisions of this Act extend to England and Wales and
Scotland only—
(a) section 34(1);
(b) subsection (2) of section 44, and subsection (1) of that section so far as
relating to subsection (2) of that section;
(c) subsection (4) of section 44, so far as  it makes provision in relation to an
offence under section 1(1) or (1A)  of the Restriction of Offensive
Weapons Act 1959, and subsection (1) of that section so far as relatingto that provision made  by subsection (4);
(d) section 54;
(e) section 61;
(f) section 64(1) to (4);
(g) paragraphs 10 and 12 of Schedule 2, and section 56 and paragraph 9 of
that Schedule so far as relating to paragraphs 10 and 12 of thatSchedule.
(3) The following provisions of this Act extend to England and Wales and
Northern Ireland only—
(a) section 13(3);
(b) section 45;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary63
(c) subsections (8) to (11) and (16) of section 46, and subsection (1) of that
section so far as relating to subsections (8) to (11) and (16) of thatsection;
(d) subsections (3) to (10) of section 47, and subsection (1) of that section so
far as relating to subsection s (3) to (9) of that section.
(4) The following provisions of this Act extend to England and Wales only—
(a) sections 8 to 10;
(b) section 13(1), (2 ), (4), (6) and (7);
(c) Part 2;
(d) section 35;
(e) Part 5;
(f) paragraphs 7 and 8 of Schedule 2, and section 56 so far as relating to
those paragraphs.
(5) The following provisions of th is Act extend to Scotland only—
(a) section 5;
(b) section 7;
(c) section 11;
(d) section 13(5);
(e) subsections (2) and (3) of section 36 , and subsection (1) of that section
so far as relating to subsecti ons (2) and (3) of that section;
(f) subsections (12) to (14), (18) and (1 9) of section 46, an d subsection (1) of
that section so far as relating to subsections (12) to (14) of that section;
(g) section 47(11) to (14).
(6) The following provisions extend to Northern Ireland only—
(a) section 12;
(b) section 34(2);
(c) section 37;
(d) section 43(2);
(e) section 44(5) to (7);
(f) section 46(17);
(g) subsection (2) of section 47, and subsection (1) of that section so far as
relating to subsection (2) of that section;
(h) section 55;
(i) section 62;
(j) paragraphs 11 and 13 of Schedule 2, and section 56 and paragraph 9 of
that Schedule so far as relating to paragraphs 11 and 13 of thatSchedule.
(7) Section 67 extends to—
(a) England and Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland,
(b) the Isle of Man, and
(c) the British overseas territories.
(8) The power under section 384(1) of the Armed Forces Act 2006 may be exercised
so as to extend to any of the Chan nel Islands any of the amendments of
S c h e d u l e  1  t o  t h a t  A c t  m a d e  b y  s e c t i o n  6 7  o f  t h i s  A c t  ( w i t h  o r  w i t h o u tmodifications).
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary64
(9) The power under section 384(2) of the Armed Forces Act 2006 may be exercised
so as to modify Schedule 1 to that Act as amended by section 67 as that sectionextends to the Isle of Man or the British overseas territories.
70 Commencement
(1) Subject to section 31 and subsections (2 ), (3) and (5), this Act comes into force
on such day as the Se cretary of State may by regulations appoint.
(2) The following provisions come into fo rce, so far as exte nding to Scotland, on
such day as the Scottish Minist ers may by regulations appoint—
(a) sections 5 to 7;
(b) section 11;
(c) section 13(5);
(d) section 34(1);
(e) section 36;
(f) sections 38 to 42;
(g) section 44 except so far as it make s provision in relation to an offence
under section 50(2) or (3) of the Customs and Excise Management Act
1979;
(h) sections 46 and 47;
(i) section 66 so far as it confers functions on the Scottish Ministers.
(3) The following provisions come into force, so far as extending to Northern
Ireland, on such day as the Department  of Justice in Northern Ireland may by
order appoint—
(a) sections 1 to 4;
(b) section 6;
(c) section 12;
(d) section 34(2);
(e) sections 37 to 42;
(f) section 43(2);
(g) section 44(5) to (7);
(h) sections 45 and 46;
(i) section 47 except so far as it make s provision in relation to a defence for
a person charged with an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of the
Customs and Excise Management Act 1979;
(j) sections 48 and 49 so far as they confer functions on the Department of
Justice in Northern Ireland or the Ch ief Constable of the Police Service
of Northern Ireland;
(k) section 62;
(l) section 66 so far as it confers fu nctions on the Depart ment of Justice in
Northern Ireland;
(m) Schedule 1.
(4) Different days may be appointed under subsection (1), (2) or (3) for different
purposes or areas.
(5) The following provisions of this Act come into force on the day on which this
Act is passed—
(a) sections 30 and 31;
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary65
(b) sections 48 and 49 except so far as they confer functions on the
Department of Justice in Northern Ir eland or the Chief Constable of the
Police Service of Northern Ireland;
(c) section 54(1);
(d) subsection (2) of section 54 so far as it has the effe ct of prohibiting—
(i) the purchase or acquisition of a weapon of a kind referred to in
that subsection, or
(ii) the manufacture, sale or transf er, or purchase or acquisition for
sale or transfer, of such a weapon;
(e) subsection (3) of section 54 so far as it has the effect of prohibiting—
(i) the purchase or acquisition of a device of a kind referred to in
that subsection, or
(ii) the manufacture, sale or transf er, or purchase or acquisition for
sale or transfer, of such a device;
(f) subsection (4) of section 54 so far as  it has the effect of prohibiting the
manufacture, sale or transfer, or purchase or acquisition for sale or
transfer, of a device of a kind referred to in that subsection;
(g) section 54(5) and (7)(a); 
(h) section 55(1);
(i) subsection (2) of section 55 so far as  it has the effect of prohibiting the
purchase or acquisition, or manufact ure, sale or transfer, of a weapon
of a kind referred to  in that subsection;
(j) subsection (3) of section 55 so far as  it has the effect of prohibiting the
purchase or acquisition, or manufactur e, sale or transfer, of a device of
a kind referred to in that subsection;
(k) section 55(6)(a);
(l) sections 57 to 61;
(m) section 63;
(n) section 68;
(o) section 69;
(p) this section;
(q) section 71.
(6) The Secretary of State may by regula tions make transitional, transitory or
saving provision in connection with th e coming into force of any provision of
this Act other than—
(a) a provision mentioned in  subsection (2) so far as the provision extends
to Scotland, or
(b) a provision mentioned in subsection  (3) so far as the provision extends
to Northern Ireland.
(7) The Scottish Ministers may by regula tions make transiti onal, transitory or
saving provision in connection with th e coming into force of any provision of
this Act mentioned in subsection (2) so far as the provision extends to Scotland.
(8) The Department of Justic e in Northern Ireland may by  order make transitional,
transitory or saving provision in connec tion with the coming into force of any
provision of this Act mentio ned in subsection (3) so far as the provision extends
to Northern Ireland.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Part 8 — Supplementary66
71 Short title
This Act may be cited as the Offensive Weapons Act 2019.
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Schedule 1 — Corrosive products67
SCHEDULES
SCHEDULE 1 Section 1
CORROSIVE  PRODUCTS
1 This is the table referred to in section 1(11)—
SCHEDULE 2 Section 56
CONSEQUENTIAL  AMENDMENTS  RELATING  TO SECTIONS  54 AND  55
Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 (c. 2)
1 The Customs and Excise Management Act 1979 is amended as follows.
2 In section 50(5A) (penalty for improper importation of certain firearms)—
(a) in paragraph (a), after “(a f)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”, and
(b) in paragraph (b), after “(e)” insert “, (ea), (fa)”.
3 In section 68(4A) (penalty for offence in relation to exportation of certain
firearms)—
(a) in paragraph (a), after “(a f)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”, andName of substance and Chemical Abstracts 
Registry number (CAS RN)Concentration limit (weight in weight)
Ammonium hydroxide (CAS RN 1336-
21-6)10% w/w
Formic acid (CAS RN 64-18-6) 10% w/w
Hydrochloric acid (CAS RN 7647-01-0) 10% w/wHydrofluoric acid (CAS RN 7664-39-3) 0% w/wNitric acid (CAS RN 7697-37-2) 3% w/wPhosphoric acid (CAS RN 7664-38-2) 70% w/wSodium hydroxide (CAS RN 1310-73-2) 12% w/wSodium hypochlorite (CAS RN 7681-
52-9)10% w/w
Sulfuric acid (CAS RN 7664-93-9) 15% w/w
Offensive Weapons Act 2019 (c. 17)
Schedule 2 — Consequential amendmen ts relating to sections 54 and 5568
(b) in paragraph (b), after “(e)” insert “, (ea), (fa)”.
4 In section 170(4A) (penalty for cust oms offences relating to certain
firearms)—
(a) in paragraph (a), after “(a f)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”, and
(b) in paragraph (b), after “(e)” insert “, (ea), (fa)”.
5 An amendment made by any of paragraphs 2(a), 3(a) and 4(a) applies only
in relation to an offence in relation to  a firearm of a kind specified in section
5(1)(ag) or (ba) of the Firearms Act 1968 which is committed after the coming
into force of the amendment.
6 An amendment made by any of paragraphs 2(b), 3(b) and 4(b) applies only
in relation to an offence in  relation to a firearm of a kind specified in Article
45(1)(ea) or (fa) of the Firearms (Nor thern Ireland) Order 2004 (SI 2004/702
(NI 3)) which is committed after the coming into force of the amendment.
Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (c. 6)
7 (1) Section 91 of the Powers of Criminal Courts (Sentencing) Act 2000 (offenders
under 18 convicted of certain serious offences: power to detain for specified
period) is amended as follows.
(2) In subsection (1A)(a)(i), afte r “(af)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”.
(3) In subsection (1B)(a), after “(af)” insert “, (ag), (ba)”.
8 The amendments made by paragraph 7 apply only in relation to—
(a) an offence under section 5(1)(ag) or (ba) of the Firearms Act 1968
which is committed after the coming into force of paragraph 7, and
(b) an offence under a prov ision listed in section 51A(1A)(b), (e) or (f) of
that Act in respect of a firearm spec ified in section 5(1)(ag) or (ba) of
that Act which is committed after th e coming into force of paragraph
7.
Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (c. 38)
9 The Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 is amended as follows.
10 In section 29(3)(b) (offence in Engl and and Wales and Scotland of using
someone to mind a weapon: penalties in  cases involving certain firearms) for
“mentioned in section 5(1)(a) to (af) or (c)” substitute “spe cified in section
5(1)(a) to (ag) or (ba)”.
11 In paragraph 2(3)(b) of Schedule 2 (offence in Northern Ireland of using
someone to mind a weapon: penalties in  cases involving certain firearms) for
“mentioned in Article 3(1)(a) or 45(1)(a), (aa), (b), (c), (d), (e) or (g) or (2)(a)”
substitute “specified in Arti cle 3(1)(a) or 45(1)(a), (aa), (b), (c), (d), (e), (ea) or
(fa) or (2)(a)”.
12 The amendment made by paragraph 10 applies only in relation to an offence
under section 28 of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 which is
committed after the coming into force of paragraph 10.
13 The amendment made by paragraph 11 applies only in relation to an offence
under paragraph 1 of Sche dule 2 to the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006
which is committed after the coming into force of paragraph 11.
?Crown copyright 2019
Printed and published in the UK by The Stationery Office Limited under the authority and superintendence of Jeff James, 
Controller of Her Majesty’s Stationery Office and Queen’s Printer of Acts of Parliament.
Published by TSO (The Stationery Office), a Williams Lea company,
and available from:
Online
www.tsoshop.co.uk
Mail, Telephone, Fax & E-mail
TSO
PO Box 29, Norwich, NR3 1GN
Telephone orders/General enquiries: 0333 202 5070
Fax orders: 0333 202 5080
E-mail: customer.services@wlt.com
Textphone: 0333 202 5077
TSO@Blackwell and other Accredited AgentsISBN 978-0-10-570057-9 
9 780105 700579 
ISBN 978-0-10-570058-6 
9 780105 700586 