Draft Order laid before Parliament under section 14 1(11E) of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, for 
approval by resolution of each House of Parliament.  
D R A F T  S T A T U T O R Y  I N S T R U M E N T S  
2024 No.  
CRIMINAL LAW, ENGLAND AND WALES 
The Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) 
(Amendment, Surrender and Compensation) Order 2024 
Made - - - - *** 
Coming into force in accordance with article 1(2) 
The Secretary of State makes the following Order in  exercise of the powers conferred by sections 
141(2), (11D) and (12A) of the Criminal Justice Act  1988( a). 
In accordance with section 141(11E)( b) of that Act, a draft of the instrument was laid b efore 
Parliament and approved by a resolution of each Hou se of Parliament. 
PART 1 
Introductory 
Citation, commencement and extent 
1. —(1) This Order may be cited as the Criminal Justic e Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) 
(Amendment, Surrender and Compensation) Order 2024.  
(2)  This Order comes into force as follows— 
(a)  This Part and Part 3 come into force on 26th June 2 024; 
(b)  Part 2 comes into force on 24th September 2024; 
(c)  Part 4 comes into force on 26th August 2024. 
(3)  This Order extends to England and Wales. 
PART 2 
Amendment of the Criminal Justice Act (Offensive We apons) Order 1988 
 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) 1988 c.33. Section 141(11D) is inserted by sectio n 43(4) of the Violent Crime Reduction Act 2006 (c. 38). Section 141(12A) 
is inserted by section 46(15) of the Offensive Weap ons Act 2019 (c. 17). 
(b) Inserted by section 43(4) of the Violent Crime Re duction Act 2006 (c.38). 
 22. —(1) The Schedule to the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) Order 1988( a) is 
amended as follows. 
(2)  In paragraph 1, after sub-paragraph (s) insert— 
“(sa) the weapon sometimes known as a “zombie-style  knife” or “zombie-style 
machete”, being a bladed article with— 
 (i) a plain cutting edge; 
 (ii) a sharp pointed end; and 
 (iii) a blade of over 8 inches in length (the leng th of the blade being the straight-
line distance from the top of the handle to the tip  of the blade), 
which also has one or more of the features specifie d in paragraph 1A and which is 
not a weapon that falls under paragraph 1(s);” 
(3)  After paragraph 1, insert— 
“1A. —(1) For the purposes of paragraph 1(sa), the speci fied features are— 
(a) a serrated cutting edge (other than a serrated cutting edge of up to 2 inches next to 
the handle); 
(b) more than one hole in the blade; 
(c) spikes; 
(d) more than two sharp points in the blade (other than a sharp point of a kind 
specified in sub-paragraph (2)). 
(2) The kinds of sharp point mentioned in sub-parag raph (1)(d) are— 
(a) a sharp point where the angle between the edges  which create the point is an angle 
of at least 90 degrees (where there is a curved edg e, the angle will be measured by 
reference to the tangent of the curve); 
(b) a sharp point on the cutting edge of the blade near the handle.” 
(4)  In paragraph 5A, after “paragraph 1(r)” in both pla ces where those words occur insert “or 
(sa)”.  
(5)  In paragraph 5B — 
(a)  in sub-paragraphs (1) to (4), after “curved sword”,  in each place those words occur, insert 
“, zombie-style knife or zombie-style machete”; 
(b)  after “the sword”, wherever those words occur, inse rt “, knife or machete”; 
(c)  in sub-paragraph (5), after the definition of “curv ed sword”, insert— 
““zombie-style knife or zombie-style machete” means  a weapon to which section 141 
of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies by virtue of paragraph 1(sa);” 
(6)  After paragraph 5B, insert— 
“5C.  It is a defence for a person charged—  
(a) with an offence under section 141(1) of the Cri minal Justice Act 1988; or 
(b) with an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of t he Customs and Excise Management 
Act 1979,  
in respect of any conduct of the person relating to  a weapon to which section 141 of the 
Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies by virtue of para graph 1(sa) to show that the weapon in 
question is one of historical importance. 
5D. —(1) It is a defence for a person charged— 
(a) with an offence under section 141(1) or (1A) of  the Criminal Justice Act 1988; or 
                                                                                                                                            
(a) S.I. 1988/2019, amended by S.I. 2002/1668, 2004/1 271, 2008/973, 2008/2039, 2016/803 and the Offensiv e Weapons Act 
2019 (c. 17). There are other amendments but they a re not relevant. 
 3(b) with an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of t he Customs and Excise Management 
Act 1979, 
in respect of any conduct of the person relating to  a weapon to which section 141 of the 
Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies by virtue of para graph 1(sa) to show that the weapon was 
made by hand.  
(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1), a weapon  is made by hand if the making 
(including construction, finish and decoration) of the weapon is accomplished 
predominantly by one or more of the following metho ds— 
(a) hand labour;  
(b) manually-controlled methods which permit the ma ker to control and vary the 
construction, shape, design and finish of each part  of each weapon (including the 
use of hand-controlled power tools). 
5E. —(1) It is a defence for a person charged— 
(a) with an offence under section 141(1) or (1A) of  the Criminal Justice Act 1988; or 
(b) with an offence under section 50(2) or (3) of t he Customs and Excise Management 
Act 1979,  
in respect of any conduct of the person relating to  a weapon to which section 141 of the 
Criminal Justice Act 1988 applies by virtue of para graph 1(r) or (sa) to show that the 
weapon in question is blunt.  
(2) For the purposes of sub-paragraph (1), a weapon  is blunt if it does not have any of the 
following elements—  
(a) a thin edge adapted to cutting; 
(b) a sharp point adapted to piercing;   
(c) any other element adapted to cutting or piercin g.” 
PART 3 
Arrangements for surrender of weapons 
Arrangements for surrender of weapons 
3. —(1) The Secretary of State must make such arrangem ents as the Secretary of State thinks fit 
to secure the orderly surrender at designated polic e stations in England and Wales of weapons the 
possession in private of which will become unlawful  by virtue of Part 2. 
(2)  The chief officer of police for any area may design ate any police station in the chief officer’s 
area as being suitable for the receipt of weapons s urrendered in accordance with the arrangements 
made under paragraph (1). 
PART 4 
Compensation for surrendered weapons 
Interpretation 
4.  In this Part— 
“officer” means any person authorised to accept sur render of weapons in accordance with 
arrangements made under article 3; 
“the standard level of compensation” means the leve l of compensation provided in article 5. 
 4Value of surrendered weapons 
5.  The standard level of compensation to be paid for each weapon surrendered in accordance 
with arrangements under this Part is £10. 
Eligibility for compensation 
6.  Compensation may be claimed by a person— 
(a)  in respect of a weapon, possession in private of wh ich will become unlawful by virtue of 
Part 2; 
(b)  who— 
(i)  owned the weapon on 26th August 2024, or 
(ii)  on or before 26th August 2024 had contracted to acq uire the weapon; 
(c)  who has surrendered the weapon in accordance with a rrangements made under article 3 
within the period beginning with 26th August 2024 a nd ending with 23rd September 
2024; and 
(d)  who has made a declaration that the person is the l egal owner of the weapon and that it 
was lawfully acquired. 
Receipt for weapon surrendered 
7. —(1) An officer receiving a weapon must, if satisfi ed that the criteria in article 6 have been 
met, issue a receipt containing a unique reference number to the person who surrendered the 
weapon. 
(2)  The officer must ensure that a copy of the receipt is retained with the weapon surrendered. 
Claims for compensation 
8. —(1) The claim form to be used for the purposes of this article is set out in the Schedule. 
(2)  A person who has surrendered a weapon in accordance  with arrangements made under 
article 3 may make a claim to the Secretary of Stat e on the claim form mentioned in paragraph (1). 
(3)  The claim form, to be forwarded by the officer to t he Secretary of State, must be submitted 
at the same time as the weapon is surrendered. 
(4)  The claim form must contain— 
(a)  the claimant’s full name, date of birth and address ; 
(b)  details of the bank account into which any compensa tion is to be paid; 
(c)  the unique reference number contained on the receip t issued under article 7; and 
(d)  the amount of compensation sought. 
(5)  If the amount of compensation sought is higher than  the standard level of compensation, the 
claimant must provide sufficient evidence of valuat ion of the weapon to enable the Secretary of 
State to determine the claim. 
(6)  Evidence of valuation of a weapon may include— 
(a)  a valuation from an auction house; 
(b)  evidence of the price paid for the purchase of the weapon and the date of purchase; or 
(c)  published evidence of the value of the weapon. 
(7)  If not satisfied that the evidence of valuation sup plied under paragraph (5) is sufficient to 
enable a determination of the claim to be made, the  Secretary of State may request additional 
evidence to be supplied. 
 5Determination and payment of claims 
9. —(1) The Secretary of State must determine a claim made under article 8 as soon as 
reasonably practicable. 
(2)  No compensation is payable in respect of a claim wh ich amounts to less than £30, but 
subject to that, the amount payable is to be determ ined in accordance with paragraphs (3) and (4). 
(3)  The amount of compensation payable for a weapon, if  any, is the standard level of 
compensation, unless the claimant has indicated tha t a higher amount of compensation is sought. 
(4)  Where the claimant has sought a higher amount of co mpensation than the standard level of 
compensation, the amount payable, if any, is to be determined by the Secretary of State taking 
account of the valuation evidence supplied. 
(5)  If satisfied that compensation is payable under thi s Part, the Secretary of State must— 
(a)  notify the claimant in writing of the amount of com pensation that the Secretary of State 
considers is payable and give reasons for the decis ion; and 
(b)  make payment of the amount determined into the bank  account nominated for this 
purpose on the claim form submitted by the claimant . 
(6)  If not satisfied that compensation is payable under  this Part, the Secretary of State must 
notify the claimant in writing that no compensation  is to be paid and give reasons for the decision. 
 
 
 Name  
 Minister of State 
Date Home Office 
 
 6 
 SCHEDULE  Article 8(1) 
Claim Form 
 
SURRENDER AND COMPENSATION SCHEME CLAIM FORM 
PART A – Your Details 
Title    
Forename    
Surname    
Date of Birth  Day  Month Year 
Your address House number   
 Street   
 Village, Town or City   
 County   
 Postcode   
Contact number    
Email     
PART B - Do you want to claim financial compensatio n for the item(s) you are surrendering 
to the police? Note your claim must amount to £30 o r over to be eligible for compensation. 
Tick which box applies. 
Yes   Now go to Part C of this form 
No   Now go to Part D of this form 
 
 7 
 
PART C – Your bank account 
 
All compensation payments will be made by cheque if  it is determined that compensation is 
payable. Please provide here the details of the ban k account into which any compensation awarded 
to you will be paid. These details will be included  on any cheque that is issued by the Home 
Office. 
Name of account holder  
Account number  
Bank sort code  
PART D – Declaration and signature 
I declare that I have read the guidance for the sch eme. 
I declare that I am the legal owner of the weapon(s ) that I am surrendering to the police and it 
was/they were lawfully acquired by me.  
I confirm that I understand that in surrendering th e item(s) described in this form to the police, I 
have relinquished any entitlement to the ownership or use of the item(s). 
I confirm that I owned the weapon(s) on the relevan t date or contracted to acquire it on or before 
that date in order to be eligible to make a claim. The date is as follows: 26th August 2024. 
If seeking compensation: I will accept the listed v alue in relation to the items for which I am 
making a claim. Tick which box applies. 
Yes    
No    
Some    
If “Yes” is ticked, I accept that the police may di spose of the item(s) concerned straightaway.  
To the best of my knowledge and belief all the item (s) surrendered as part of this application are 
eligible for payment under the published terms of t his scheme.  
By signing this declaration, I authorise the police  to pass on the information contained in this form 
to the Home Office for the purposes of processing a ny claim that I am making for financial 
compensation.  
Signature………………………………………………………………… Date……………………. 
 
 
 8 
PART E – Person surrendering the item(s) if not the  legal owner 
If you are surrendering the item(s) on behalf of th e legal owner, please fill in the below form with 
your details. This is in addition to the signature of the legal owner above. 
If you are surrendering item(s) on behalf of the le gal owner, if the owner is unable to do so for any 
reason, please complete the following information a bout you.  
Title    
Forename(s)    
Surname    
Date of birth Day Month Year 
Your address House number   
 Street   
 Village, town or city   
 Postcode   
Signature………………………………………………………… Date…………………….. 
 
 9 
 
 
PART F – The Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive W eapons) (Amendment, Surrender and 
Compensation) Order 2024 
Ref. 
Official use 
only How many 
zombie-
style knives 
or 
machetes? Seeking 
compensati 
on? Enter 
Y/N If Y, do you 
accept the 
standard 
value of 
£10? Enter 
Y/N If N and 
claiming 
individual 
value, enter 
value (£) Has 
evidence to 
support 
individual 
value been 
provided? 
Enter Y/N Total claim 
for items 
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
       
 10  
Annex A: Guidance for completing the Criminal Justi ce Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) 
(Amendment, Surrender and Compensation) Order 2024 - Claim Form 
This section provides guidance for individuals comp leting this form. Further information can be 
found in ‘The Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) (Amendment, Surrender and 
Compensation) Order 2024 - Guidance for surrender a nd claiming compensation’ available on 
www.gov.uk. Alternatively, you can ask for assistan ce at the police station in which you are 
surrendering your items, or you can email your ques tion to the Home Office (email address will be 
published on gov.uk).  
PART A – Your details 
Please use this Part to provide the relevant detail s in the correct boxes. The police will need to 
verify your identity and it is important to provide  correct contact details so you can be contacted 
regarding your claim(s) for compensation. Your phon e number can be a landline or mobile.  
Part A should include an email contact address. Con tact by email rather than by post will avoid 
any delays in considering claims or paying compensa tion. 
PART B – Do you want to claim financial compensatio n for the item(s) you are surrendering 
to the police? 
Under the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weap ons) (Amendment, Surrender and 
Compensation) Order 2024 Surrender and Compensation  Scheme, legitimate and eligible owners 
of zombie-style knives or zombie-style machetes are  entitled to financial compensation to cover 
the value of any item surrendered.  
Please use this Part to indicate whether you are cl aiming financial compensation by ticking the 
relevant box - ‘Yes’ or ‘No’.  
Note, in the Order, the Home Office has set at £10 the standard amount of compensation that will 
be paid to the lawful owners of items that are surr endered to the police under this scheme. If you 
consider that your item is worth more than the stan dard amount of compensation, it is open to you 
to make a claim for the higher amount and if you wi sh to do so you must provide acceptable 
evidence of this value. This evidence, which must b e submitted at the time of surrendering the 
item to the police, will be forwarded to the Home O ffice for consideration alongside your 
compensation claim. The amount of compensation due to you will be decided by the Home Office. 
If your claim is for over £10 for any single item, you will need to provide proof of ownership and 
it is recommended that you provide a photograph of the item as well. Further information on your 
potential entitlement and how to claim compensation  can be found in ‘The Criminal Justice Act 
1988 (Offensive Weapons) (Amendment, Surrender and Compensation) Order 2024 - Guidance 
for surrender and claiming compensation’ which is a vailable on www.gov.uk. 
PART C – Your bank account 
If it is determined that compensation is payable, w e will issue a cheque for that amount to be paid 
into the account specified in Part C of this form. 
 
 
 11  
 
PART D – Declaration 
You are required to complete this Part to confirm t hat you are the legal owner of the item(s) that 
you are surrendering, that it was lawfully acquired  and that you are eligible to claim 
compensation, if applicable. You should have also r ead and ensured that you understood the 
guidance for the scheme before signing. Signing thi s Part also signals that you understand that in 
surrendering the item(s) you relinquish your owners hip of the item(s) you are surrendering. If you 
are claiming financial compensation, you are also r equired to use this Part to confirm the 
following:  
You will accept the compensation value listed in th is document for your item(s); 
You will not accept the compensation value listed i n this document for your item(s) and are 
seeking a higher amount;  
You will accept the compensation value listed in th is document for some of your item(s) but will 
not accept the compensation value listed for other item(s). 
You must tick which box applies to your application . If you are claiming compensation for an 
offensive weapon, you must have been the lawful own er on 26th August 2024. 
If you acquired any of the above items after the re levant dates, you will still need to safely dispose  
of the items and should do so by surrendering them to the police at a designated police station. 
You will not, however, be eligible to claim compens ation under this scheme. Signing the 
declaration also confirms that you agree that the p olice can pass on the information contained in 
this form to the Home Office for the purposes of pr ocessing any claim that you are making for 
financial compensation. Further information on your  potential entitlement and how to claim 
compensation can be found in ‘The Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) (Amendment, 
Surrender and Compensation) Order 2024 - Guidance f or surrender and claiming compensation’ 
which is available on www.gov.uk. 
 
 
 12  
 
Annex B – This section is to be completed by the po lice 
To be completed by the police. Once completed, a co py will be provided to the claimant as a 
receipt. 
Application unique reference 
number: Format is Police Station 
Code + Property booking in 
reference. E.g. XXX-123456  
Police Force  
Name of receiving officer or staff 
(please print)  
Receiving station name  
Date received   
Identity of claimant confirmed? 
(Y/N)  
Ownership of claimant 
confirmed? (Y/N)  
All surrendered items correctly 
detailed? (Y/N) if no, use the box 
below for details  
Is the value of the claim £30 or 
over? (Y/N)  
Valuation of relevant items 
provided and attached? (Y/N)  
Declarations completed and 
signed by application? (Y/N)  
Additional comments: The space below is for the police to record any oth er information not 
provided elsewhere in this form. If required, furth er detail can be recorded on another page.  
For police use:  Once completed, the entire form with all supportin g documents should then be 
sent to and email address which will be published i n gov.uk in due course (with the compensation 
claim’s unique reference number added to the subjec t line. The Home Office will review the claim 
and respond directly to the claimant to confirm pro gress and next steps in due course. A copy or 
photo of the completed receipt at Annex B should be  given to the claimant. 
 
 
 
 13 EXPLANATORY NOTE 
(This note is not part of the Order) 
Section 141 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988 (“sect ion 141”) provides that any person who 
manufactures, sells or hires or offers for sale or hire, exposes or has in his possession for the 
purpose of sale or hire, or lends or gives to any o ther person, a weapon to which that section 
applies shall be guilty of an offence and liable on  summary conviction to imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding six months or to a fine or both. The importation of any such weapon is prohibited. 
Section 141 also provides that any person who posse sses in private a weapon to which the section 
applies is guilty of an offence and liable on summa ry conviction to imprisonment for a term not 
exceeding 51 weeks, to a fine or to both.  
The Criminal Justice Act 1988 (Offensive Weapons) O rder 1988 (S.I. 1988/2019) (the “1988 
Order”) specifies descriptions of weapons to which section 141 applies and sets out defences to 
the section 141 offences.  
Part 2 of this Order adds a new weapon description at paragraph 1(sa) in the Schedule to the 1988 
Order (the weapon sometimes known as a “zombie-styl e knife” or “zombie-style machete”), 
provides for defences to the section 141 offences i n relation to this new weapon description, and 
provides for a bluntness defence which applies to b oth paragraph 1(sa) and paragraph 1(r) 
weapons (curved swords). 
Parts 3 and 4 of this Order provide for a scheme un der which compensation can be claimed by 
persons surrendering weapons which fall under the n ew paragraph 1(sa).  
Article 6 makes provision as to eligibility for com pensation, article 7 provides for officers 
accepting the surrendered items to issue a receipt,  article 8 provides for claims to be submitted 
where knives have been surrendered and for the form s to be transmitted to the Secretary of State, 
and article 9 provides for determination of claims and payment by the Secretary of State. The 
claim form is set out in the Schedule. 
The standard level of compensation for these weapon s, set at £10, is the amount of compensation 
payable unless the person claiming the compensation  contends that the value exceeds that amount. 
If the person claims that the value exceeds the sta ndard level, valuation evidence must be 
submitted and the level of compensation payable is to be determined by the Secretary of State. 
The surrender arrangements referred to in this inst rument may be obtained at gov.uk. 
A full impact assessment of the effect that this in strument will have on the costs to business is 
published with an Explanatory Memorandum alongside the instrument on www.legislation.gov.uk. 
  
  
© Crown copyright 2024 
Printed and published in the UK by The Stationery O ffice Limited under the authority and superintenden ce of Jeff James, 
Controller of His Majesty’s Stationery Office and K ing’s Printer of Acts of Parliament. 
  
  
 £8.14 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/id/ukdsi/2024/9780348 256871  
